“Dog! bite pig; piggy won't go over the stile; and I shan't get home
to-night.” But the dog wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met a stick. So she said: “Stick!
stick! beat dog! dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and
I shan't get home to-night.” But the stick wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met a fire. So she said: “Fire! fire!
burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get
over the stile; and I shan't get home to-night.” But the fire wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met some water. So she said: “Water,
water! quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog
won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I shan't get home
to-night.” But the water wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met an ox. So she said: “Ox! ox!
drink water; water won't quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't
beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I
shan't get home to-night.” But the ox wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met a butcher. So she said: “Butcher!
butcher! kill ox; ox won't drink water; water won't quench fire; fire
won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't
get over the stile; and I shan't get home to-night.” But the butcher
wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met a rope. So she said: “Rope! rope!
hang butcher; butcher won't kill ox; ox won't drink water; water won't
quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite
pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I shan't get home to-night.”
 But the rope wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met a rat. So she said: “Rat! rat!
gnaw rope; rope won't hang butcher; butcher won't kill ox; ox won't
drink water; water won't quench fire; fire won't burn stick; stick won't
beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over the stile; and I
shan't get home to-night.” But the rat wouldn't.

She went a little further, and she met a cat. So she said: “Cat! cat!
kill rat; rat won't gnaw rope; rope won't hang butcher; butcher won't
kill ox; ox won't drink water; water won't quench fire; fire won't burn
stick; stick won't beat dog; dog won't bite pig; piggy won't get over
the stile; and I shan't get home to-night.” But the cat said to her, “If
you will go to yonder cow, and fetch me a saucer of milk, I will kill
the rat.” So away went the old woman to the cow.

But the cow said to her: “If you will go to yonder hay-stack, and fetch
me a handful of hay, I'll give you the milk.” So away went the old woman
to the haystack and she brought the hay to the cow.

As soon as the cow had eaten the hay, she gave the old woman the milk;
and away she went with it in a saucer to the cat.

As soon as the cat had lapped up the milk, the cat began to kill the
rat; the rat began to gnaw the rope; the rope began to hang the butcher;
the butcher began to kill the ox; the ox began to drink the water; the
water began to quench the fire; the fire began to burn the stick; the
stick began to beat the dog; the dog began to bite the pig; the little
pig in a fright jumped over the stile, and so the old woman got home
that night.




HOW JACK WENT TO SEEK HIS FORTUNE

Once on a time there was a boy named Jack, and one morning he started to
go and seek his fortune.

He hadn't gone very far before he met a cat.

“Where are you going, Jack?” said the cat.

“I am going to seek my fortune.”

“May I go with you?”

“Yes,” said Jack, “the more the merrier.”

So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt.

They went a little further and they met a dog.

“Where are you going, Jack?” said the dog.

“I am going to seek my fortune.”

“May I go with you?”

“Yes,” said Jack, “the more the merrier.”

So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt. They went a little
further and they met a goat.

“Where are you going, Jack?” said the goat.

“I am going to seek my fortune.”

“May I go with you?”

“Yes,” said Jack, “the more the merrier.”

So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt.

They went a little further and they met a bull.

“Where are you going, Jack?” said the bull.

“I am going to seek my fortune.”

“May I go with you?”

“Yes,” said Jack, “the more the merrier.”

So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt.

They went a little further and they met a rooster.

“Where are you going, Jack?” said the rooster.

“I am going to seek my fortune.”

“May I go with you?”

“Yes,” said Jack, “the more the merrier.”

So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt.

Well, they went on till it was about dark, and they began to think of
some place where they could spend the night. About this time they came
in sight of a house, and Jack told them to keep still while he went up
and looked in through the window. And there were some robbers counting
over their money. Then Jack went back and told them to wait till he gave
the word, and then to make all the noise they could. So when they were
all ready Jack gave the word, and the cat mewed, and the dog barked, and
the goat bleated, and the bull bellowed, and the rooster crowed, and all
together they made such a dreadful noise that it frightened the robbers
all away.

And then they went in and took possession of the house. Jack was afraid
the robbers would come back in the night, and so when it came time to go
to bed he put the cat in the rocking-chair, and he put the dog under the
table, and he put the goat upstairs, and he put the bull down cellar,
and the rooster flew up on to the roof, and Jack went to bed.

By-and-by the robbers saw it was all dark and they sent one man back to
the house to look after their money. Before long he came back in a great
fright and told them his story.

“I went back to the house,” said he, “and went in and tried to sit down
in the rocking-chair, and there was an old woman knitting, and she stuck
her knitting-needles into me.” That was the cat, you know.

“I went to the table to look after the money and there was a shoemaker
under the table, and he stuck his awl into me.” That was the dog, you
know.

“I started to go upstairs, and there was a man up there threshing, and
he knocked me down with his flail.” That was the goat, you know.

“I started to go down cellar, and there was a man down there chopping
wood, and he knocked me up with his axe.” That was the bull, you know.

“But I shouldn't have minded all that if it hadn't been for that little
fellow on top of the house, who kept a-hollering, 'Chuck him up to me-e!
Chuck him up to me-e!'” Of course that was the cock-a-doodle-do.




MR. VINEGAR

Mr. and Mrs. Vinegar lived in a vinegar bottle. Now, one day, when Mr.
Vinegar was from home, Mrs. Vinegar, who was a very good housewife, was
busily sweeping her house, when an unlucky thump of the broom brought
the whole house clitter-clatter, clitter-clatter, about her ears. In an
agony of grief she rushed forth to meet her husband.

On seeing him she exclaimed, “Oh, Mr. Vinegar, Mr. Vinegar, we are
ruined, I have knocked the house down, and it is all to pieces!” Mr.
Vinegar then said: “My dear, let us see what can be done. Here is
the door; I will take it on my back, and we will go forth to seek our
fortune.”

They walked all that day, and at nightfall entered a thick forest. They
were both very, very tired, and Mr. Vinegar said: “My love, I will climb
up into a tree, drag up the door, and you shall follow.” He accordingly
did so, and they both stretched their weary limbs on the door, and fell
fast asleep.

In the middle of the night Mr. Vinegar was disturbed by the sound of
voices underneath, and to his horror and dismay found that it was a band
of thieves met to divide their booty.

“Here, Jack,” said one, “here's five pounds for you; here, Bill, here's
ten pounds for you; here, Bob, here's three pounds for you.”

Mr. Vinegar could listen no longer; his terror was so great that he
trembled and trembled, and shook down the door on their heads. Away
scampered the thieves, but Mr. Vinegar dared not quit his retreat till
broad daylight.

He then scrambled out of the tree, and went to lift up the door. What
did he see but a number of golden guineas. “Come down, Mrs. Vinegar,” he
cried; “come down, I say; our fortune's made, our fortune's made! Come
down, I say.”

Mrs. Vinegar got down as fast as she could, and when she saw the money
she jumped for joy. “Now, my dear,” said she, “I'll tell you what you
shall do. There is a fair at the neighbouring town; you shall take these
forty guineas and buy a cow. I can make butter and cheese, which
you shall sell at market, and we shall then be able to live very
comfortably.”

Mr. Vinegar joyfully agrees, takes the money, and off he goes to the
fair. When he arrived, he walked up and down, and at length saw a
beautiful red cow. It was an excellent milker, and perfect in every
way. “Oh,” thought Mr. Vinegar, “if I had but that cow, I should be the
happiest, man alive.”

So he offers the forty guineas for the cow, and the owner said that, as
he was a friend, he'd oblige him. So the bargain was made, and he got
the cow and he drove it backwards and forwards to show it.

By-and-by he saw a man playing the bagpipes--Tweedle-dum tweedle-dee.
The children followed him about, and he appeared to be pocketing money
on all sides. “Well,” thought Mr. Vinegar, “if I had but that beautiful
instrument I should be the happiest man alive--my fortune would be
made.”

So he went up to the man. “Friend,” says he, “what a beautiful
instrument that is, and what a deal of money you must make.” “Why, yes,”
 said the man, “I make a great deal of money, to be sure, and it is a
wonderful instrument.” “Oh!” cried Mr. Vinegar, “how I should like to
possess it!” “Well,” said the man, “as you are a friend, I don't much
mind parting with it; you shall have it for that red cow.” “Done!” said
the delighted Mr. Vinegar. So the beautiful red cow was given for the
bagpipes.

He walked up and down with his purchase; but it was in vain he tried
to play a tune, and instead of pocketing pence, the boys followed him
hooting, laughing, and pelting.

Poor Mr. Vinegar, his fingers grew very cold, and, just as he was
leaving the town, he met a man with a fine thick pair of gloves. “Oh,
my fingers are so very cold,” said Mr. Vinegar to himself. “Now if I had
but those beautiful gloves I should be the happiest man alive.” He went
up to the man, and said to him, “Friend, you seem to have a capital pair
of gloves there.” “Yes, truly,” cried the man; “and my hands are as warm
as possible this cold November day.” “Well,” said Mr. Vinegar, “I should
like to have them.”. “What will you give?” said the man; “as you are
a friend, I don't much mind letting you have them for those bagpipes.”
 “Done!” cried Mr. Vinegar. He put on the gloves, and felt perfectly
happy as he trudged homewards.

At last he grew very tired, when he saw a man coming towards him with a
good stout stick in his hand.

“Oh,” said Mr. Vinegar, “that I had but that stick! I should then be the
happiest man alive.” He said to the man: “Friend! what a rare good stick
you have got.” “Yes,” said the man; “I have used it for many a long
mile, and a good friend it has been; but if you have a fancy for it,
as you are a friend, I don't mind giving it to you for that pair of
gloves.” Mr. Vinegar's hands were so warm, and his legs so tired, that
he gladly made the exchange.

As he drew near to the wood where he had left his wife, he heard a
parrot on a tree calling out his name: “Mr. Vinegar, you foolish man,
you blockhead, you simpleton; you went to the fair, and laid out all
your money in buying a cow. Not content with that, you changed it
for bagpipes, on which you could not play, and which were not worth
one-tenth of the money. You fool, you--you had no sooner got the
bagpipes than you changed them for the gloves, which were not worth
one-quarter of the money; and when you had got the gloves, you changed
them for a poor miserable stick; and now for your forty guineas, cow,
bagpipes, and gloves, you have nothing to show but that poor miserable
stick, which you might have cut in any hedge.” On this the bird laughed
and laughed, and Mr. Vinegar, falling into a violent rage, threw the
stick at its head. The stick lodged in the tree, and he returned to his
wife without money, cow, bagpipes, gloves, or stick, and she instantly
gave him such a sound cudgelling that she almost broke every bone in his
skin.




NIX NOUGHT NOTHING

There once lived a king and a queen as many a one has been. They were
long married and had no children; but at last a baby-boy came to the
queen when the king was away in the far countries. The queen would not
christen the boy till the king came back, and she said, “We will just
call him _Nix Nought Nothing_ until his father comes home.” But it was
long before he came home, and the boy had grown a nice little laddie.
At length the king was on his way back; but he had a big river to cross,
and there was a whirlpool, and he could not get over the water. But a
giant came up to him, and said “I'll carry you over.” But the king said:
“What's your pay?” “O give me Nix, Nought, Nothing, and I will carry you
over the water on my back.” The king had never heard that his son was
called Nix Nought Nothing, and so he said: “O, I'll give you that and
my thanks into the bargain.” When the king got home again, he was very
happy to see his wife again, and his young son. She told him that she
had not given the child any name, but just Nix Nought Nothing, until he
should come home again himself. The poor king was in a terrible case.
He said: “What have I done? I promised to give the giant who carried me
over the river on his back, Nix Nought Nothing.” The king and the queen
were sad and sorry, but they said: “When the giant comes we will give
him the hen-wife's boy; he will never know the difference.” The next
day the giant came to claim the king's promise, and he sent for the
hen-wife's boy; and the giant went away with the boy on his back. He
travelled till he came to a big stone, and there he sat down to rest. He
said,

“Hidge, Hodge, on my back, what time of day is that?”

The poor little boy said: “It is the time that my mother, the hen-wife,
takes up the eggs for the queen's breakfast.”

The Giant was very angry, and dashed the boy's head on the stone and
killed him.

So he went back in a tower of a temper and this time they gave him the
gardener's boy. He went off with him on his back till they got to the
stone again when the giant sat down to rest. And he said:

“Hidge, Hodge, on my back, what time of day do you make that?”

The gardener's boy said: “Sure it's the time that my mother takes up the
vegetables for the queen's dinner.” Then the giant was right wild and
dashed his brains out on the stone.

Then the giant went back to the king's house in a terrible temper and
said he would destroy them all if they did not give him Nix Nought
Nothing this time. They had to do it; and when he came to the big stone,
the giant said: “What time of day is that?” Nix Nought Nothing said: “It
is the time that my father the king will be sitting down to supper.” The
giant said: “I've got the right one now;” and took Nix Nought Nothing to
his own house and brought him up till he was a man.

The giant had a bonny daughter, and she and the lad grew very fond of
each other. The giant said one day to Nix Nought Nothing: “I've work for
you to-morrow. There is a stable seven miles long and seven miles broad,
and it has not been cleaned for seven years, and you must clean it
to-morrow, or I will have you for my supper.”

The giant's daughter went out next morning with the lad's breakfast, and
found him in a terrible state, for always as he cleaned out a bit, it
just fell in again. The giant's daughter said she would help him, and
she cried all the beasts in the field, and all the fowls of the air, and
in a minute they all came, and carried away everything that was in the
stable and made it all clean before the giant came home. He said: “Shame
on the wit that helped you; but I have a worse job for you to-morrow.”
 Then he said to Nix Nought Nothing: “There's a lake seven miles long,
and seven miles deep, and seven miles broad, and you must drain it
to-morrow by nightfall, or else I'll have you for my supper.” Nix Nought
Nothing began early next morning and tried to lave the water with his
pail, but the lake was never getting any less, and he didn't know what
to do; but the giant's daughter called on all the fish in the sea to
come and drink the water, and very soon they drank it dry. When the
giant saw the work done he was in a rage, and said: “I've a worse job
for you to-morrow; there is a tree, seven miles high, and no branch on
it, till you get to the top, and there is a nest with seven eggs in it,
and you must bring down all the eggs without breaking one, or else I'll
have you for my supper.” At first the giant's daughter did not know how
to help Nix Nought Nothing; but she cut off first her fingers and then
her toes, and made steps of them, and he clomb the tree and got all the
eggs safe till he came just to the bottom, and then one was broken. So
they determined to run away together and after the giant's daughter had
tidied up her hair a bit and got her magic flask they set out together
as fast as they could run. And they hadn't got but three fields away
when they looked back and saw the giant walking along at top speed after
them. “Quick, quick,” called out the giant's daughter, “take my comb
from my hair and throw it down.” Nix Nought Nothing took her comb from
her hair and threw it down, and out of every one of its prongs there
sprung up a fine thick briar in the way of the giant. You may be sure it
took him a long time to work his way through the briar bush and by the
time he was well through Nix Nought Nothing and his sweetheart had run
on a tidy step away from him. But he soon came along after them and was
just like to catch 'em up when the giant's daughter called out to Nix
Nought Nothing, “Take my hair dagger and throw it down, quick, quick.”
 So Nix Nought Nothing threw down the hair dagger and out of it grew as
quick as lightning a thick hedge of sharp razors placed criss-cross. The
giant had to tread very cautiously to get through all this and meanwhile
the young lovers ran on, and on, and on, till they were nearly out of
sight. But at last the giant was through, and it wasn't long before he
was like to catch them up. But just as he was stretching out his hand
to catch Nix Nought Nothing his daughter took out her magic flask and
dashed it on the ground. And as it broke out of it welled a big, big
wave that grew, and that grew, till it reached the giant's waist and
then his neck, and when it got to his head, he was drowned dead, and
dead, and dead indeed. So he goes out of the story.

But Nix Nought Nothing fled on till where do you think they came to?
Why, to near the castle of Nix Nought Nothing's father and mother. But
the giant's daughter was so weary that she couldn't move a step further.
So Nix Nought Nothing told her to wait there while he went and found
out a lodging for the night. And he went on towards the lights of the
castle, and on the way he came to the cottage of the hen-wife whose
boy had had his brains dashed out by the giant. Now she knew Nix Nought
Nothing in a moment, and hated him because he was the cause of her son's
death. So when he asked his way to the castle she put a spell upon him,
and when he got to the castle, no sooner was he let in than he fell down
dead asleep upon a bench in the hall. The king and queen tried all they
could do to wake him up, but all in vain. So the king promised that if
any lady could wake him up she should marry him. Meanwhile the giant's
daughter was waiting and waiting for him to come back. And she went up
into a tree to watch for him. The gardener's daughter, going to draw
water in the well, saw the shadow of the lady in the water and thought
it was herself, and said; “If I'm so bonny, if I'm so brave, why do you
send me to draw water?” So she threw down her pail and went to see if
she could wed the sleeping stranger. And she went to the hen-wife, who
taught her an unspelling catch which would keep Nix Nought Nothing awake
as long as the gardener's daughter liked. So she went up to the castle
and sang her catch and Nix Nought Nothing was wakened for a bit and they
promised to wed him to the gardener's daughter. Meanwhile the gardener
went down to draw water from the well and saw the shadow of the lady in
the water. So he looks up and finds her, and he brought the lady from
the tree, and led her into his house. And he told her that a stranger
was to marry his daughter, and took her up to the castle and showed her
the man: and it was Nix Nought Nothing asleep in a chair. And she saw
him, and cried to him: “Waken, waken, and speak to me!” But he would not
waken, and soon she cried:

  “I cleaned the stable, I laved the lake, and I clomb the tree,
  And all for the love of thee,
  And thou wilt not waken and speak to me.”

The king and the queen heard this, and came to the bonny young lady, and
she said:

“I cannot get Nix Nought Nothing to speak to me for all that I can do.”

Then were they greatly astonished when she spoke of Nix Nought Nothing,
and asked where he was, and she said: “He that sits there in the chair.”
 Then they ran to him and kissed him and called him their own dear son;
so they called for the gardener's daughter and made her sing her charm,
and he wakened, and told them all that the giant's daughter had done
for him, and of all her kindness. Then they took her in their arms and
kissed her, and said she should now be their daughter, for their son
should marry her. But they sent for the hen-wife and put her to death.
And they lived happy all their days.




JACK HANNAFORD

There was an old soldier who had been long in the wars--so long, that
he was quite out-at-elbows, and he did not know where to go to find a
living. So he walked up moors, down glens, till at last he came to a
farm, from which the good man had gone away to market. The wife of the
farmer was a very foolish woman, who had been a widow when he married
her; the farmer was foolish enough, too, and it is hard to say which of
the two was the more foolish. When you've heard my tale you may decide.

Now before the farmer goes to market says he to his wife: “Here is ten
pounds all in gold, take care of it till I come home.” If the man had
not been a fool he would never have given the money to his wife to keep.
Well, off he went in his cart to market, and the wife said to herself:
“I will keep the ten pounds quite safe from thieves;” so she tied it up
in a rag, and she put the rag up the parlour chimney.

“There,” said she, “no thieves will ever find it now, that is quite
sure.”

Jack Hannaford, the old soldier, came and rapped at the door.

“Who is there?” asked the wife.

“Jack Hannaford.”

“Where do you come from?”

“Paradise.”

“Lord a' mercy! and maybe you've seen my old man there,” alluding to her
former husband.

“Yes, I have.”

“And how was he a-doing?” asked the goody.

“But middling; he cobbles old shoes, and he has nothing but cabbage for
victuals.”

“Deary me!” exclaimed the woman. “Didn't he send a message to me?”

“Yes, he did,” replied Jack Hannaford. “He said that he was out of
leather, and his pockets were empty, so you were to send him a few
shillings to buy a fresh stock of leather.”

“He shall have them, bless his poor soul!” And away went the wife to the
parlour chimney, and she pulled the rag with the ten pounds in it from
the chimney, and she gave the whole sum to the soldier, telling him that
her old man was to use as much as he wanted, and to send back the rest.

It was not long that Jack waited after receiving the money; he went off
as fast as he could walk.

Presently the farmer came home and asked for his money. The wife told
him that she had sent it by a soldier to her former husband in Paradise,
to buy him leather for cobbling the shoes of the saints and angels of
Heaven. The farmer was very angry, and he swore that he had never met
with such a fool as his wife. But the wife said that her husband was a
greater fool for letting her have the money.

There was no time to waste words; so the farmer mounted his horse and
rode off after Jack Hannaford. The old soldier heard the horse's hoofs
clattering on the road behind him, so he knew it must be the farmer
pursuing him. He lay down on the ground, and shading his eyes with one
hand, looked up into the sky, and pointed heavenwards with the other
hand.

“What are you about there?” asked the farmer, pulling up.

“Lord save you!” exclaimed Jack: “I've seen a rare sight.”

“What was that?”

“A man going straight up into the sky, as if he were walking on a road.”

“Can you see him still?”

“Yes, I can.”

“Where?”

“Get off your horse and lie down.”

“If you will hold the horse.”

Jack did so readily.

“I cannot see him,” said the farmer.

“Shade your eyes with your hand, and you'll soon see a man flying away
from you.”

Sure enough he did so, for Jack leaped on the horse, and rode away with
it. The farmer walked home without his horse.

“You are a bigger fool than I am,” said the wife; “for I did only one
foolish thing, and you have done two.”




BINNORIE

Once upon a time there were two king's daughters lived in a bower near
the bonny mill-dams of Binnorie. And Sir William came wooing the eldest
and won her love and plighted troth with glove and with ring. But after
a time he looked upon the youngest, with her cherry cheeks and golden
hair, and his love grew towards her till he cared no longer for the
eldest one. So she hated her sister for taking away Sir William's love,
and day by day her hate grew upon her, and she plotted and she planned
how to get rid of her.

So one fine morning, fair and clear, she said to her sister, “Let us
go and see our father's boats come in at the bonny mill-stream of
Binnorie.” So they went there hand in hand. And when they got to the
river's bank the youngest got upon a stone to watch for the coming of
the boats. And her sister, coming behind her, caught her round the waist
and dashed her into the rushing mill-stream of Binnorie.

“O sister, sister, reach me your hand!” she cried, as she floated away,
“and you shall have half of all I've got or shall get.”

“No, sister, I'll reach you no hand of mine, for I am the heir to all
your land. Shame on me if I touch the hand that has come 'twixt me and
my own heart's love.”

“O sister, O sister, then reach me your glove!” she cried, as she
floated further away, “and you shall have your William again.”

“Sink on,” cried the cruel princess, “no hand or glove of mine you'll
touch. Sweet William will be all mine when you are sunk beneath the
bonny mill-stream of Binnorie.” And she turned and went home to the
king's castle.

And the princess floated down the mill-stream, sometimes swimming
and sometimes sinking, till she came near the mill. Now the miller's
daughter was cooking that day, and needed water for her cooking. And as
she went to draw it from the stream, she saw something floating towards
the mill-dam, and she called out, “Father! father! draw your dam.
There's something white--a merry maid or a milk-white swan--coming down
the stream.” So the miller hastened to the dam and stopped the heavy
cruel mill-wheels. And then they took out the princess and laid her on
the bank.

Fair and beautiful she looked as she lay there. In her golden hair were
pearls and precious stones; you could not see her waist for her golden
girdle; and the golden fringe of her white dress came down over her lily
feet. But she was drowned, drowned!

And as she lay there in her beauty a famous harper passed by the
mill-dam of Binnorie, and saw her sweet pale face. And though he
travelled on far away he never forgot that face, and after many days he
came back to the bonny mill-stream of Binnorie. But then all he could
find of her where they had put her to rest were her bones and her
golden hair. So he made a harp out of her breast-bone and her hair, and
travelled on up the hill from the mill-dam of Binnorie, till he came to
the castle of the king her father.

That night they were all gathered in the castle hall to hear the great
harper--king and queen, their daughter and son, Sir William and all
their Court. And first the harper sang to his old harp, making them joy
and be glad or sorrow and weep just as he liked. But while he sang he
put the harp he had made that day on a stone in the hall. And presently
it began to sing by itself, low and clear, and the harper stopped and
all were hushed.

And this was what the harp sung:

  “O yonder sits my father, the king,
    Binnorie, O Binnorie;
  And yonder sits my mother, the queen;
    By the bonny mill-dams o' Binnorie,

  “And yonder stands my brother Hugh,
    Binnorie, O Binnorie;
  And by him, my William, false and true;
    By the bonny mill-dams o' Binnorie.”

Then they all wondered, and the harper told them how he had seen the
princess lying drowned on the bank near the bonny mill-dams o'
Binnorie, and how he had afterwards made this harp out of her hair and
breast-bone. Just then the harp began singing again, and this was what
it sang out loud and clear:

  “And there sits my sister who drownèd me
  By the bonny mill-dams o' Binnorie.”

And the harp snapped and broke, and never sang more.




MOUSE AND MOUSER

The Mouse went to visit the Cat, and found her sitting behind the hall
door, spinning.

MOUSE. What are you doing, my lady, my lady, What are you doing, my
lady?

CAT (_sharply_). I'm spinning old breeches, good body, good body I'm
spinning old breeches, good body.

MOUSE. Long may you wear them, my lady, my lady, Long may you wear them,
my lady.

CAT (_gruffly_). I'll wear' em and tear 'em, good body, good body. I'll
wear 'em and tear 'em, good body.

MOUSE. I was sweeping my room, my lady, my lady, I was sweeping my room,
my lady.

CAT. The cleaner you'd be, good body, good body, The cleaner you'd be,
good body.

MOUSE. I found a silver sixpence, my lady, my lady, I found a silver
sixpence, my lady.

CAT. The richer you were, good body, good body, The richer you were,
good body.

MOUSE. I went to the market, my lady, my lady, I went to the market, my
lady.

CAT. The further you went, good body, good body The further you went,
good body.

MOUSE. I bought me a pudding, my lady, my lady, I bought me a pudding,
my lady.

CAT (_snarling_). The more meat you had, good body, good body, The more
meat you had, good body.

MOUSE. I put it in the window to cool, my lady, I put it in the window
to cool.

CAT. (_sharply_). The faster you'd eat it, good body, good body, The
faster you'd eat it, good body.

MOUSE (_timidly_). The cat came and ate it, my lady, my lady, The cat
came and ate it, my lady.

CAT (_pouncingly_). And I'll eat you, good body, good body, And I'll eat
you, good body.

(_Springs upon the mouse and kills it._)




CAP O' RUSHES

Well, there was once a very rich gentleman, and he'd three daughters,
and he thought he'd see how fond they were of him. So he says to the
first, “How much do you love me, my dear?”

“Why,” says she, “as I love my life.”

“That's good,” says he.

So he says to the second, “How much do _you_ love me, my dear?”

“Why,” says she, “better nor all the world.”

“That's good,” says he.

So he says to the third, “How much do _you_ love me, my dear?”

“Why, I love you as fresh meat loves salt,” says she.

Well, he was that angry. “You don't love me at all,” says he, “and in
my house you stay no more.” So he drove her out there and then, and shut
the door in her face.

Well, she went away on and on till she came to a fen, and there she
gathered a lot of rushes and made them into a kind of a sort of a
cloak with a hood, to cover her from head to foot, and to hide her fine
clothes. And then she went on and on till she came to a great house.

“Do you want a maid?” says she.

“No, we don't,” said they.

“I haven't nowhere to go,” says she; “and I ask no wages, and do any
sort of work,” says she.

“Well,” says they, “if you like to wash the pots and scrape the
saucepans you may stay,” said they.

So she stayed there and washed the pots and scraped the saucepans and
did all the dirty work. And because she gave no name they called her
“Cap o' Rushes.”

Well, one day there was to be a great dance a little way off, and the
servants were allowed to go and look on at the grand people. Cap o'
Rushes said she was too tired to go, so she stayed at home.

But when they were gone she offed with her cap o' rushes, and cleaned
herself, and went to the dance. And no one there was so finely dressed
as her.

Well, who should be there but her master's son, and what should he do
but fall in love with her the minute he set eyes on her. He wouldn't
dance with any one else.

But before the dance was done Cap o' Rushes slipt off, and away she went
home. And when the other maids came back she was pretending to be asleep
with her cap o' rushes on.

Well, next morning they said to her, “You did miss a sight, Cap o'
Rushes!”

“What was that?” says she.

“Why, the beautifullest lady you ever see, dressed right gay and ga'.
The young master, he never took his eyes off her.”

“Well, I should have liked to have seen her,” says Cap o' Rushes.

“Well, there's to be another dance this evening, and perhaps she'll be
there.”

But, come the evening, Cap o' Rushes said she was too tired to go with
them. Howsoever, when they were gone, she offed with her cap o' rushes
and cleaned herself, and away she went to the dance.

The master's son had been reckoning on seeing her, and he danced with
no one else, and never took his eyes off her. But, before the dance was
over, she slipt off, and home she went, and when the maids came back
she, pretended to be asleep with her cap o' rushes on.

Next day they said to her again, “Well, Cap o' Rushes, you should ha'
been there to see the lady. There she was again, gay and ga', and the
young master he never took his eyes off her.”

“Well, there,” says she, “I should ha' liked to ha' seen her.”

“Well,” says they, “there's a dance again this evening, and you must go
with us, for she's sure to be there.”

Well, come this evening, Cap o' Rushes said she was too tired to go, and
do what they would she stayed at home. But when they were gone she offed
with her cap o' rushes and cleaned herself, and away she went to the
dance.

The master's son was rarely glad when he saw her. He danced with none
but her and never took his eyes off her. When she wouldn't tell him her
name, nor where she came from, he gave her a ring and told her if he
didn't see her again he should die.

Well, before the dance was over, off she slipped, and home she went, and
when the maids came home she was pretending to be asleep with her cap o'
rushes on.

Well, next day they says to her, “There, Cap o' Rushes, you didn't come
last night, and now you won't see the lady, for there's no more dances.”

“Well I should have rarely liked to have seen her,” says she.

The master's son he tried every way to find out where the lady was gone,
but go where he might, and ask whom he might, he never heard anything
about her. And he got worse and worse for the love of her till he had to
keep his bed.

“Make some gruel for the young master,” they said to the cook. “He's
dying for the love of the lady.” The cook she set about making it when
Cap o' Rushes came in.

“What are you a-doing of?”, says she.

“I'm going to make some gruel for the young master,” says the cook, “for
he's dying for love of the lady.”

“Let me make it,” says Cap o' Rushes.

Well, the cook wouldn't at first, but at last she said yes, and Cap o'
Rushes made the gruel. And when she had made it she slipped the ring
into it on the sly before the cook took it upstairs.

The young man he drank it and then he saw the ring at the bottom.

“Send for the cook,” says he.

So up she comes.

“Who made this gruel here?” says he.

“I did,” says the cook, for she was frightened.

And he looked at her,

“No, you didn't,” says he. “Say who did it, and you shan't be harmed.”

“Well, then, 'twas Cap o' Rushes,” says she.

“Send Cap o' Rushes here,” says he.

So Cap o' Rushes came.

“Did you make my gruel?” says he.

“Yes, I did,” says she.

“Where did you get this ring?” says he.

“From him that gave it me,” says she.

“Who are you, then?” says the young man.

“I'll show you,” says she. And she offed with her cap o' rushes, and
there she was in her beautiful clothes.

Well, the master's son he got well very soon, and they were to be
married in a little time. It was to be a very grand wedding, and every
one was asked far and near. And Cap o' Rushes' father was asked. But she
never told anybody who she was.

But before the wedding she went to the cook, and says she:

“I want you to dress every dish without a mite o' salt.”

“That'll be rare nasty,” says the cook.

“That doesn't signify,” says she.

“Very well,” says the cook.

Well, the wedding-day came, and they were married. And after they were
married all the company sat down to the dinner. When they began to eat
the meat, that was so tasteless they couldn't eat it. But Cap o' Rushes'
father he tried first one dish and then another, and then he burst out
crying.

“What is the matter?” said the master's son to him.

“Oh!” says he, “I had a daughter. And I asked her how much she loved me.
And she said 'As much as fresh meat loves salt.' And I turned her from
my door, for I thought she didn't love me. And now I see she loved me
best of all. And she may be dead for aught I know.”

“No, father, here she is!” says Cap o' Rushes. And she goes up to him
and puts her arms round him.

And so they were happy ever after.




TEENY-TINY

Once upon a time there was a teeny-tiny woman lived in a teeny-tiny
house in a teeny-tiny village. Now, one day this teeny-tiny woman put
on her teeny-tiny bonnet, and went out of her teeny-tiny house to take
a teeny-tiny walk. And when this teeny-tiny woman had gone a teeny-tiny
way she came to a teeny-tiny gate; so the teeny-tiny woman opened the
teeny-tiny gate, and went into a teeny-tiny churchyard. And when this
teeny-tiny woman had got into the teeny-tiny churchyard, she saw a
teeny-tiny bone on a teeny-tiny grave, and the teeny-tiny woman said to
her teeny-tiny self, “This teeny-tiny bone will make me some teeny-tiny
soup for my teeny-tiny supper.” So the teeny-tiny woman put the
teeny-tiny bone into her teeny-tiny pocket, and went home to her
teeny-tiny house.

Now when the teeny-tiny woman got home to her teeny-tiny house she was
a teeny-tiny bit tired; so she went up her teeny-tiny stairs to her
teeny-tiny bed, and put the teeny-tiny bone into a teeny-tiny cupboard.
And when this teeny-tiny woman had been to sleep a teeny-tiny time, she
was awakened by a teeny-tiny voice from the teeny-tiny cupboard, which
said:

“Give me my bone!”

And this teeny-tiny woman was a teeny-tiny frightened, so she hid her
teeny-tiny head under the teeny-tiny clothes and went to sleep again.
And when she had been to sleep again a teeny-tiny time, the teeny-tiny
voice again cried out from the teeny-tiny cupboard a teeny-tiny louder,
“Give me my bone!”

This made the teeny-tiny woman a teeny-tiny more frightened, so she hid
her teeny-tiny head a teeny-tiny further under the teeny-tiny clothes.
And when the teeny-tiny woman had been to sleep again a teeny-tiny
time, the teeny-tiny voice from the teeny-tiny cupboard said again a
teeny-tiny louder,

“Give me my bone!”

And this teeny-tiny woman was a teeny-tiny bit more frightened, but she
put her teeny-tiny head out of the teeny-tiny clothes, and said in her
loudest teeny-tiny voice, “TAKE IT!”




JACK AND THE BEANSTALK

There was once upon a time a poor widow who had an only son named Jack,
and a cow named Milky-white. And all they had to live on was the milk
the cow gave every morning which they carried to the market and sold.
But one morning Milky-white gave no milk and they didn't know what to
do.

“What shall we do, what shall we do?” said the widow, wringing her
hands.

“Cheer up, mother, I'll go and get work somewhere,” said Jack.

“We've tried that before, and nobody would take you,” said his mother;
“we must sell Milky-white and with the money do something, start shop,
or something.”

“All right, mother,” says Jack; “it's market-day today, and I'll soon
sell Milky-white, and then we'll see what we can do.”

So he took the cow's halter in his hand, and off he starts. He hadn't
gone far when he met a funny-looking old man who said to him: “Good
morning, Jack.”

“Good morning to you,” said Jack, and wondered how he knew his name.

“Well, Jack, and where are you off to?” said the man.

“I'm going to market to sell our cow here.”

“Oh, you look the proper sort of chap to sell cows,” said the man; “I
wonder if you know how many beans make five.”

“Two in each hand and one in your mouth,” says Jack, as sharp as a
needle.

“Right you are,” said the man, “and here they are the very beans
themselves,” he went on pulling out of his pocket a number of
strange-looking beans. “As you are so sharp,” says he, “I don't mind
doing a swop with you--your cow for these beans.”

“Walker!” says Jack; “wouldn't you like it?”

“Ah! you don't know what these beans are,” said the man; “if you plant
them over-night, by morning they grow right up to the sky.”

“Really?” says Jack; “you don't say so.”

“Yes, that is so, and if it doesn't turn out to be true you can have
your cow back.”

“Right,” says Jack, and hands him over Milky-white's halter and pockets
the beans.

Back goes Jack home, and as he hadn't gone very far it wasn't dusk by
the time he got to his door.

“What back, Jack?” said his mother; “I see you haven't got Milky-white,
so you've sold her. How much did you get for her?”

“You'll never guess, mother,” says Jack.

“No, you don't say so. Good boy! Five pounds, ten, fifteen, no, it can't
be twenty.”

“I told you you couldn't guess, what do you say to these beans; they're
magical, plant them over-night and----”

“What!” says Jack's mother, “have you been such a fool, such a dolt,
such an idiot, as to give away my Milky-white, the best milker in the
parish, and prime beef to boot, for a set of paltry beans. Take that!
Take that! Take that! And as for your precious beans here they go out of
the window. And now off with you to bed. Not a sup shall you drink, and
not a bit shall you swallow this very night.”

So Jack went upstairs to his little room in the attic, and sad and sorry
he was, to be sure, as much for his mother's sake, as for the loss of
his supper.

At last he dropped off to sleep.

When he woke up, the room looked so funny. The sun was shining into part
of it, and yet all the rest was quite dark and shady. So Jack jumped
up and dressed himself and went to the window. And what do you think
he saw? why, the beans his mother had thrown out of the window into the
garden, had sprung up into a big beanstalk which went up and up and up
till it reached the sky. So the man spoke truth after all.

The beanstalk grew up quite close past Jack's window, so all he had to
do was to open it and give a jump on to the beanstalk which was made
like a big plaited ladder. So Jack climbed and he climbed and he climbed
and he climbed and he climbed and he climbed and he climbed till at last
he reached the sky. And when he got there he found a long broad road
going as straight as a dart. So he walked along and he walked along
and he walked along till he came to a great big tall house, and on the
doorstep there was a great big tall woman.

“Good morning, mum,” says Jack, quite polite-like. “Could you be so kind
as to give me some breakfast.” For he hadn't had anything to eat, you
know, the night before and was as hungry as a hunter.

“It's breakfast you want, is it?” says the great big tall woman, “it's
breakfast you'll be if you don't move off from here. My man is an ogre
and there's nothing he likes better than boys broiled on toast. You'd
better be moving on or he'll soon be coming.”

“Oh! please mum, do give me something to eat, mum. I've had nothing to
eat since yesterday morning, really and truly, mum,” says Jack. “I may
as well be broiled, as die of hunger.”

Well, the ogre's wife wasn't such a bad sort, after all. So she took
Jack into the kitchen, and gave him a junk of bread and cheese and a jug
of milk. But Jack hadn't half finished these when thump! thump! thump!
the whole house began to tremble with the noise of someone coming.

“Goodness gracious me! It's my old man,” said the ogre's wife, “what on
earth shall I do? Here, come quick and jump in here.” And she bundled
Jack into the oven just as the ogre came in.

He was a big one, to be sure. At his belt he had three calves strung up
by the heels, and he unhooked them and threw them down on the table and
said: “Here, wife, broil me a couple of these for breakfast. Ah what's
this I smell?

  Fee-fi-fo-fum,
  I smell the blood of an Englishman,
  Be he alive, or be he dead
  I'll have his bones to grind my bread.”

“Nonsense, dear,” said his wife, “you're dreaming. Or perhaps you smell
the scraps of that little boy you liked so much for yesterday's dinner.
Here, go you and have a wash and tidy up, and by the time you come back
your breakfast'll be ready for you.”

So the ogre went off, and Jack was just going to jump out of the oven
and run off when the woman told him not. “Wait till he's asleep,” says
she; “he always has a snooze after breakfast.”

Well, the ogre had his breakfast, and after that he goes to a big chest
and takes out of it a couple of bags of gold and sits down counting them
till at last his head began to nod and he began to snore till the whole
house shook again.

Then Jack crept out on tiptoe from his oven, and as he was passing the
ogre he took one of the bags of gold under his arm, and off he pelters
till he came to the beanstalk, and then he threw down the bag of gold
which of course fell in to his mother's garden, and then he climbed down
and climbed down till at last he got home and told his mother and showed
her the gold and said: “Well, mother, wasn't I right about the beans.
They are really magical, you see.”

So they lived on the bag of gold for some time, but at last they came to
the end of that so Jack made up his mind to try his luck once more up at
the top of the beanstalk. So one fine morning he got up early, and got
on to the beanstalk, and he climbed and he climbed and he climbed and
he climbed and he climbed and he climbed till at last he got on the road
again and came to the great big tall house he had been to before. There,
sure enough, was the great big tall woman a-standing on the door-step.

“Good morning, mum,” says Jack, as bold as brass, “could you be so good
as to give me something to eat?”

“Go away, my boy,” said the big, tall woman, “or else my man will eat
you up for breakfast. But aren't you the youngster who came here once
before? Do you know, that very day, my man missed one of his bags of
gold.”

“That's strange, mum,” says Jack, “I dare say I could tell you something
about that but I'm so hungry I can't speak till I've had something to
eat.”

Well the big tall woman was that curious that she took him in and gave
him something to eat. But he had scarcely begun munching it as slowly as
he could when thump! thump! thump! they heard the giant's footstep, and
his wife hid Jack away in the oven.

All happened as it did before. In came the ogre as he did before, said:
“Fee-fi-fo-fum,” and had his breakfast off three broiled oxen. Then he
said: “Wife, bring me the hen that lays the golden eggs.” So she brought
it, and the ogre said: “Lay,” and it laid an egg all of gold. And then
the ogre began to nod his head, and to snore till the house shook.

Then Jack crept out of the oven on tiptoe and caught hold of the golden
hen, and was off before you could say “Jack Robinson.” But this time the
hen gave a cackle which woke the ogre, and just as Jack got out of the
house he heard him calling: “Wife, wife, what have you done with my
golden hen?”

And the wife said: “Why, my dear?”

But that was all Jack heard, for he rushed off to the beanstalk and
climbed down like a house on fire. And when he got home he showed his
mother the wonderful hen and said “Lay,” to it; and it laid a golden egg
every time he said “Lay.”

Well, Jack was not content, and it wasn't very long before he determined
to have another try at his luck up there at the top of the beanstalk. So
one fine morning, he got up early, and went on to the beanstalk, and he
climbed and he climbed and he climbed and he climbed till he got to
the top. But this time he knew better than to go straight to the ogre's
house. And when he got near it he waited behind a bush till he saw the
ogre's wife come out with a pail to get some water, and then he crept
into the house and got into the copper. He hadn't been there long when
he heard thump! thump! thump! as before, and in come the ogre and his
wife.

“Fee-fi-fo-fum, I smell the blood of an Englishman,” cried out the ogre;
“I smell him, wife, I smell him.”

“Do you, my dearie?” says the ogre's wife. “Then if it's that little
rogue that stole your gold and the hen that laid the golden eggs he's
sure to have got into the oven.” And they both rushed to the oven. But
Jack wasn't there, luckily, and the ogre's wife said: “There you are
again with your fee-fi-fo-fum. Why of course it's the laddie you caught
last night that I've broiled for your breakfast. How forgetful I am, and
how careless you are not to tell the difference between a live un and a
dead un.”

So the ogre sat down to the breakfast and ate it, but every now and
then he would mutter: “Well, I could have sworn----” and he'd get up
and search the larder and the cupboards, and everything, only luckily he
didn't think of the copper.

After breakfast was over, the ogre called out: “Wife, wife, bring me my
golden harp.” So she brought it and put it on the table before him. Then
he said: “Sing!” and the golden harp sang most beautifully. And it
went on singing till the ogre fell asleep, and commenced to snore like
thunder.

Then Jack lifted up the copper-lid very quietly and got down like a
mouse and crept on hands and knees till he got to the table when he got
up and caught hold of the golden harp and dashed with it towards the
door. But the harp called out quite loud: “Master! Master!” and the ogre
woke up just in time to see Jack running off with his harp.

Jack ran as fast as he could, and the ogre came rushing after, and would
soon have caught him only Jack had a start and dodged him a bit and knew
where he was going. When he got to the beanstalk the ogre was not more
than twenty yards away when suddenly he saw Jack disappear like, and
when he got up to the end of the road he saw Jack underneath climbing
down for dear life. Well, the ogre didn't like trusting himself to such
a ladder, and he stood and waited, so Jack got another start. But just
then the harp cried out: “Master! master!” and the ogre swung himself
down on to the beanstalk which shook with his weight. Down climbs Jack,
and after him climbed the ogre. By this time Jack had climbed down and
climbed down and climbed down till he was very nearly home. So he called
out: “Mother! mother! bring me an axe, bring me an axe.” And his mother
came rushing out with the axe in her hand, but when she came to the
beanstalk she stood stock still with fright for there she saw the ogre
just coming down below the clouds.

But Jack jumped down and got hold of the axe and gave a chop at the
beanstalk which cut it half in two. The ogre felt the beanstalk shake
and quiver so he stopped to see what was the matter. Then Jack gave
another chop with the axe, and the beanstalk was cut in two and began
to topple over. Then the ogre fell down and broke his crown, and the
beanstalk came toppling after.

Then Jack showed his mother his golden harp, and what with showing that
and selling the golden eggs, Jack and his mother became very rich, and
he married a great princess, and they lived happy ever after.




THE STORY OF THE THREE LITTLE PIGS

  Once upon a time when pigs spoke rhyme
  And monkeys chewed tobacco,
  And hens took snuff to make them tough,
  And ducks went quack, quack, quack, O!

There was an old sow with three little pigs, and as she had not enough
to keep them, she sent them out to seek their fortune. The first that
went off met a man with a bundle of straw, and said to him:

“Please, man, give me that straw to build me a house.”

Which the man did, and the little pig built a house with it. Presently
came along a wolf, and knocked at the door, and said:

“Little pig, little pig, let me come in.”

To which the pig answered:

“No, no, by the hair of my chiny chin chin.”

The wolf then answered to that:

“Then I'll huff, and I'll puff, and I'll blow your house in.”

So he huffed, and he puffed, and he blew his house in, and ate up the
little pig.

The second little pig met a man with a bundle of furze, and said:

“Please, man, give me that furze to build a house.”

Which the man did, and the pig built his house. Then along came the
wolf, and said:

“Little pig, little pig, let me come in.”

“No, no, by the hair of my chiny chin chin.”

“Then I'll puff, and I'll huff, and I'll blow your house in.”

So he huffed, and he puffed, and he puffed, and he huffed, and at last
he blew the house down, and he ate up the little pig.

The third little pig met a man with a load of bricks, and said:

“Please, man, give me those bricks to build a house with.”

So the man gave him the bricks, and he built his house with them. So the
wolf came, as he did to the other little pigs, and said:

“Little pig, little pig, let me come in.”

“No, no, by the hair of my chiny chin chin.”

“Then I'll huff, and I'll puff, and I'll blow your house in.”

Well, he huffed, and he puffed, and he huffed and he puffed, and he
puffed and huffed; but he could _not_ get the house down. When he found
that he could not, with all his huffing and puffing, blow the house
down, he said:

“Little pig, I know where there is a nice field of turnips.”

“Where?” said the little pig.

“Oh, in Mr. Smith's Home-field, and if you will be ready tomorrow
morning I will call for you, and we will go together, and get some for
dinner.”

“Very well,” said the little pig, “I will be ready. What time do you
mean to go?”

“Oh, at six o'clock.”

Well, the little pig got up at five, and got the turnips before the wolf
came (which he did about six) and who said:

“Little Pig, are you ready?”

The little pig said: “Ready! I have been and come back again, and got a
nice potful for dinner.”

The wolf felt very angry at this, but thought that he would be up to the
little pig somehow or other, so he said:

“Little pig, I know where there is a nice apple-tree.”

“Where?” said the pig.

“Down at Merry-garden,” replied the wolf, “and if you will not deceive
me I will come for you, at five o'clock tomorrow and get some apples.”

Well, the little pig bustled up the next morning at four o'clock, and
went off for the apples, hoping to get back before the wolf came; but
he had further to go, and had to climb the tree, so that just as he was
coming down from it, he saw the wolf coming, which, as you may suppose,
frightened him very much. When the wolf came up he said:

“Little pig, what! are you here before me? Are they nice apples?”

“Yes, very,” said the little pig. “I will throw you down one.”

And he threw it so far, that, while the wolf was gone to pick it up, the
little pig jumped down and ran home. The next day the wolf came again,
and said to the little pig:

“Little pig, there is a fair at Shanklin this afternoon, will you go?”

“Oh yes,” said the pig, “I will go; what time shall you be ready?”

“At three,” said the wolf. So the little pig went off before the time
as usual, and got to the fair, and bought a butter-churn, which he was
going home with, when he saw the wolf coming. Then he could not tell
what to do. So he got into the churn to hide, and by so doing turned it
round, and it rolled down the hill with the pig in it, which frightened
the wolf so much, that he ran home without going to the fair. He went
to the little pig's house, and told him how frightened he had been by a
great round thing which came down the hill past him. Then the little pig
said:

“Hah, I frightened you, then. I had been to the fair and bought a
butter-churn, and when I saw you, I got into it, and rolled down the
hill.”

Then the wolf was very angry indeed, and declared he _would_ eat up the
little pig, and that he would get down the chimney after him. When the
little pig saw what he was about, he hung on the pot full of water, and
made up a blazing fire, and, just as the wolf was coming down, took
off the cover, and in fell the wolf; so the little pig put on the cover
again in an instant, boiled him up, and ate him for supper, and lived
happy ever afterwards.




THE MASTER AND HIS PUPIL

There was once a very learned man in the north-country who knew all the
languages under the sun, and who was acquainted with all the mysteries
of creation. He had one big book bound in black calf and clasped with
iron, and with iron corners, and chained to a table which was made fast
to the floor; and when he read out of this book, he unlocked it with an
iron key, and none but he read from it, for it contained all the secrets
of the spiritual world. It told how many angels there were in heaven,
and how they marched in their ranks, and sang in their quires, and what
were their several functions, and what was the name of each great angel
of might. And it told of the demons, how many of them there were, and
what were their several powers, and their labours, and their names, and
how they might be summoned, and how tasks might be imposed on them, and
how they might be chained to be as slaves to man.

Now the master had a pupil who was but a foolish lad, and he acted as
servant to the great master, but never was he suffered to look into the
black book, hardly to enter the private room.

One day the master was out, and then the lad, as curious as could be,
hurried to the chamber where his master kept his wondrous apparatus
for changing copper into gold, and lead into silver, and where was his
mirror in which he could see all that was passing in the world, and
where was the shell which when held to the ear whispered all the words
that were being spoken by anyone the master desired to know about. The
lad tried in vain with the crucibles to turn copper and lead into gold
and silver--he looked long and vainly into the mirror; smoke and clouds
passed over it, but he saw nothing plain, and the shell to his ear
produced only indistinct murmurings, like the breaking of distant seas
on an unknown shore. “I can do nothing,” he said; “as I don't know the
right words to utter, and they are locked up in yon book.”

He looked round, and, see! the book was unfastened; the master had
forgotten to lock it before he went out. The boy rushed to it, and
unclosed the volume. It was written with red and black ink, and much of
it he could not understand; but he put his finger on a line and spelled
it through.

At once the room was darkened, and the house trembled; a clap of thunder
rolled through the passage and the old room, and there stood before him
a horrible, horrible form, breathing fire, and with eyes like burning
lamps. It was the demon Beelzebub, whom he had called up to serve him.

“Set me a task!” said he, with a voice like the roaring of an iron
furnace.

The boy only trembled, and his hair stood up.

“Set me a task, or I shall strangle thee!”

But the lad could not speak. Then the evil spirit stepped towards him,
and putting forth his hands touched his throat. The fingers burned his
flesh. “Set me a task!”

“Water yon flower,” cried the boy in despair, pointing to a geranium
which stood in a pot on the floor. Instantly the spirit left the room,
but in another instant he returned with a barrel on his back, and poured
its contents over the flower; and again and again he went and came, and
poured more and more water, till the floor of the room was ankle-deep.

“Enough, enough!” gasped the lad; but the demon heeded him not; the lad
didn't know the words by which to send him away, and still he fetched
water.

It rose to the boy's knees and still more water was poured. It mounted
to his waist, and Beelzebub still kept on bringing barrels full. It rose
to his armpits, and he scrambled to the table-top. And now the water
in the room stood up to the window and washed against the glass, and
swirled around his feet on the table. It still rose; it reached his
breast. In vain he cried; the evil spirit would not be dismissed, and
to this day he would have been pouring water, and would have drowned
all Yorkshire. But the master remembered on his journey that he had
not locked his book, and therefore returned, and at the moment when
the water was bubbling about the pupil's chin, rushed into the room and
spoke the words which cast Beelzebub back into his fiery home.




TITTY MOUSE AND TATTY MOUSE

Titty Mouse and Tatty Mouse both lived in a house,

Titty Mouse went a leasing and Tatty Mouse went a leasing,

So they both went a leasing.

Titty Mouse leased an ear of corn, and Tatty Mouse leased an ear of
corn,

So they both leased an ear of corn.

Titty Mouse made a pudding, and Tatty Mouse made a pudding,

So they both made a pudding.

And Tatty Mouse put her pudding into the pot to boil,

But when Titty went to put hers in, the pot tumbled over, and scalded
her to death.

Then Tatty sat down and wept; then a three-legged stool said: “Tatty,
why do you weep?” “Titty's dead,” said Tatty, “and so I weep;” “then,”
 said the stool, “I'll hop,” so the stool hopped.

Then a broom in the corner of the room said, “Stool, why do you hop?”
 “Oh!” said the stool, “Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and so I hop;”
 “then,” said the broom, “I'll sweep,” so the broom began to sweep.

“Then,” said the door, “Broom, why do you sweep?” “Oh!” said the broom,
“Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and the stool hops, and so I sweep;”
 “Then,” said the door, “I'll jar,” so the door jarred.

“Then,” said the window, “Door, why do you jar?” “Oh!” said the door,
“Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and the stool hops, and the broom
sweeps, and so I jar.”

“Then,” said the window, “I'll creak,” so the window creaked. Now there
was an old form outside the house, and when the window creaked, the form
said: “Window, why do you creak?” “Oh!” said the window, “Titty's dead,
and Tatty weeps, and the stool hops, and the broom sweeps, the door
jars, and so I creak.”

“Then,” said the old form, “I'll run round the house;” then the old form
ran round the house. Now there was a fine large walnut-tree growing by
the cottage, and the tree said to the form: “Form, why do you run round
the house?” “Oh!” said the form, “Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, and the
stool hops, and the broom sweeps, the door jars, and the window creaks,
and so I run round the house.”

“Then,” said the walnut-tree, “I'll shed my leaves,” so the walnut-tree
shed all its beautiful green leaves. Now there was a little bird perched
on one of the boughs of the tree, and when all the leaves fell, it
said: “Walnut-tree, why do you shed your leaves?” “Oh!” said the tree,
“Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, the stool hops, and the broom sweeps,
the door jars, and the window creaks, the old form runs round the house,
and so I shed my leaves.”

“Then,” said the little bird, “I'll moult all my feathers,” so he
moulted all his pretty feathers. Now there was a little girl walking
below, carrying a jug of milk for her brothers and sisters' supper,
and when she saw the poor little bird moult all its feathers, she said:
“Little bird, why do you moult all your feathers?” “Oh!” said the little
bird, “Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, the stool hops, and the broom
sweeps, the door jars, and the window creaks, the old form runs round
the house, the walnut-tree sheds its leaves, and so I moult all my
feathers.”

“Then,” said the little girl, “I'll spill the milk,” so she dropt the
pitcher and spilt the milk. Now there was an old man just by on the top
of a ladder thatching a rick, and when he saw the little girl spill the
milk, he said: “Little girl, what do you mean by spilling the milk, your
little brothers and sisters must go without their supper.” Then said
the little girl: “Titty's dead, and Tatty weeps, the stool hops, and the
broom sweeps, the door jars, and the window creaks, the old form runs
round the house, the walnut-tree sheds all its leaves, the little bird
moults all its feathers, and so I spill the milk.”

“Oh!” said the old man, “then I'll tumble off the ladder and break my
neck,” so he tumbled off the ladder and broke his neck; and when the old
man broke his neck, the great walnut-tree fell down with a crash, and
upset the old form and house, and the house falling knocked the window
out, and the window knocked the door down, and the door upset the broom,
and the broom upset the stool, and poor little Tatty Mouse was buried
beneath the ruins.




JACK AND HIS GOLDEN SNUFF-BOX

Once upon a time, and a very good time it was, though it was neither in
my time nor in your time nor in any one else's time, there was an old
man and an old woman, and they had one son, and they lived in a great
forest. And their son never saw any other people in his life, but he
knew that there was some more in the world besides his own father and
mother, because he had lots of books, and he used to read every day
about them. And when he read about some pretty young women, he used
to go mad to see some of them; till one day, when his father was out
cutting wood, he told his mother that he wished to go away to look for
his living in some other country, and to see some other people besides
them two. And he said, “I see nothing at all here but great trees around
me; and if I stay here, maybe I shall go mad before I see anything.” The
young man's father was out all this time, when this talk was going on
between him and his poor old mother.

The old woman begins by saying to her son before leaving, “Well, well,
my poor boy, if you want to go, it's better for you to go, and God
be with you.”--(The old woman thought for the best when she said
that.)--“But stop a bit before you go. Which would you like best for me
to make you, a little cake and bless you, or a big cake and curse you?”
 “Dear, dear!” said he, “make me a big cake. Maybe I shall be hungry on
the road.” The old woman made the big cake, and she went on top of the
house, and she cursed him as far as she could see him.

He presently meets with his father, and the old man says to him: “Where
are you going, my poor boy?” when the son told the father the same tale
as he told his mother. “Well,” says his father, “I'm sorry to see you
going away, but if you've made your mind to go, it's better for you to
go.”

The poor lad had not gone far, when his father called him back; then
the old man drew out of his pocket a golden snuff-box, and said to him:
“Here, take this little box, and put it in your pocket, and be sure not
to open it till you are near your death.” And away went poor Jack upon
his road, and walked till he was tired and hungry, for he had eaten all
his cake upon the road; and by this time night was upon him, so he could
hardly see his way before him. He could see some light a long way before
him, and he made up to it, and found the back door and knocked at it,
till one of the maid-servants came and asked him what he wanted. He said
that night was on him, and he wanted to get some place to sleep. The
maid-servant called him in to the fire, and gave him plenty to eat,
good meat and bread and beer; and as he was eating his food by the fire,
there came the young lady to look at him, and she loved him well and he
loved her. And the young lady ran to tell her father, and said there was
a pretty young man in the back kitchen; and immediately the gentleman
came to him, and questioned him, and asked what work he could do. Jack
said, the silly fellow, that he could do anything. (He meant that he
could do any foolish bit of work, that would be wanted about the house.)

“Well,” says the gentleman to him, “if you can do anything, at eight
o'clock in the morning I must have a great lake and some of-the largest
man-of-war vessels sailing before my mansion, and one of the largest
vessels must fire a royal salute, and the last round must break the
leg of the bed where my young daughter is sleeping. And if you don't do
that, you will have to forfeit your life.”

“All right,” said Jack; and away he went to his bed, and said his
prayers quietly, and slept till it was near eight o'clock, and he had
hardly any time to think what he was to do, till all of a sudden he
remembered about the little golden box that his father gave him. And he
said to himself: “Well, well, I never was so near my death as I am now;”
 and then he felt in his pocket, and drew the little box out. And when he
opened it, out there hopped three little red men, and asked Jack: “What
is your will with us?” “Well,” said Jack, “I want a great lake and some
of the largest man-of-war vessels in the world before this mansion, and
one of the largest vessels to fire a royal salute, and the last round
to break one of the legs of the bed where this young lady is sleeping.”
 “All right,” said the little men; “go to sleep.”

Jack had hardly time to bring the words out of his mouth, to tell the
little men what to do, but what it struck eight o'clock, when Bang, bang
went one of the largest man-of-war vessels; and it made Jack jump out of
bed to look through the window; and I can assure you it was a wonderful
sight for him to see, after being so long with his father and mother
living in a wood.

By this time Jack dressed himself, and said his prayers, and came down
laughing; for he was proud, he was, because the thing was done so well.
The gentleman comes to him, and says to him: “Well, my young man, I must
say that you are very clever indeed. Come and have some breakfast.” And
the gentleman tells him, “Now there are two more things you have to
do, and then you shall have my daughter in marriage.” Jack gets his
breakfast, and has a good squint at the young lady, and also she at him.

The other thing that the gentleman told him to do was to fell all the
great trees for miles around by eight o'clock in the morning; and, to
make my long story short, it was done, and it pleased the gentleman well
The gentleman said to him: “The other thing you have to do”--(and it
was the last thing)--“you must get me a great castle standing on twelve
golden pillars; and there must come regiments of soldiers and go through
their drill. At eight o'clock the commanding officer must say, 'Shoulder
up.'” “All right,” said Jack; when the third and last morning came
the third great feat was finished, and he had the young daughter in
marriage. But, oh dear! there is worse to come yet.

The gentleman now makes a large hunting party, and invites all the
gentlemen around the country to it, and to see the castle as well. And
by this time Jack has a beautiful horse and a scarlet dress to go with
them. On that morning his valet, when putting Jack's clothes by,
after changing them to go a hunting, put his hand in one of Jack's
waistcoat-pockets, and pulled out the little golden snuffbox, as poor
Jack left behind in a mistake. And that man opened the little box, and
there hopped the three little red men out, and asked him what he wanted
with them. “Well,” said the valet to them, “I want this castle to be
moved from this place far and far across the sea.” “All right,” said
the little red men to him; “do you wish to go with it?” “Yes,” said he.
“Well, get up,” said they to him; and away they went far and far over
the great sea.

Now the grand hunting party comes back, and the castle upon the twelve
golden pillars had disappeared, to the great disappointment of those
gentlemen as did not see it before. That poor silly Jack is threatened
by taking his beautiful young wife from him, for taking them in in the
way he did. But the gentleman at last made an agreement with him, and he
is to have a twelvemonths and a day to look for it; and off he goes with
a good horse and money in his pocket.

Now poor Jack goes in search of his missing castle, over hills, dales,
valleys, and mountains, through woolly woods and sheepwalks, further
than I can tell you or ever intend to tell you. Until at last he comes
up to the place where lives the King of all the little mice in the
world. There was one of the little mice on sentry at the front gate
going up to the palace, and did try to stop Jack from going in. He asked
the little mouse: “Where does the King live? I should like to see him.”
 This one sent another with him to show him the place; and when the King
saw him, he called him in. And the King questioned him, and asked him
where he was going that way. Well, Jack told him all the truth, that he
had lost the great castle, and was going to look for it, and he had a
whole twelvemonths and a day to find it out. And Jack asked him whether
he knew anything about it; and the King said: “No, but I am the King
of all the little mice in the world, and I will call them all up in the
morning, and maybe they have seen something of it.”

Then Jack got a good meal and bed, and in the morning he and the King
went on to the fields; and the King called all the mice together, and
asked them whether they had seen the great beautiful castle standing on
golden pillars. And all the little mice said, No, there was none of them
had seen it. The old King said to him that he had two other brothers:
“One is the King of all the frogs; and my other brother, who is the
oldest, he is the King of all the birds in the world. And if you go
there, may be they know something about the missing castle.” The King
said to him: “Leave your horse here with me till you come back, and take
one of my best horses under you, and give this cake to my brother; he
will know then who you got it from. Mind and tell him I am well, and
should like dearly to see him.” And then the King and Jack shook hands
together.

And when Jack was going through the gates, the little mouse asked him,
should he go with him; and Jack said to him: “No, I shall get myself
into trouble with the King.” And the little thing told him: “It will be
better for you to let me go with you; maybe I shall do some good to you
some time without you knowing it.” “Jump up, then.” And the little mouse
ran up the horse's leg, and made it dance; and Jack put the mouse in his
pocket.

Now Jack, after wishing good morning to the King and pocketing the
little mouse which was on sentry, trudged on his way; and such a long
way he had to go and this was his first day. At last he found the place;
and there was one of the frogs on sentry, and gun upon his shoulder, and
did try to hinder Jack from going in; but when Jack said to him that he
wanted to see the King, he allowed him to pass; and Jack made up to the
door. The King came out, and asked him his business; and Jack told
him all from beginning to end. “Well, well, come in.” He gets good
entertainment that night; and in the morning the King made such a funny
sound, and collected all the frogs in the world. And he asked them,
did they know or see anything of a castle that stood upon twelve golden
pillars; and they all made a curious sound, _Kro-kro, kro-kro_, and
said, No.

Jack had to take another horse, and a cake to this King's brother, who
is the King of all the fowls of the air; and as Jack was going through
the gates, the little frog that was on sentry asked John should he go
with him. Jack refused him for a bit; but at last he told him to jump
up, and Jack put him in his other waistcoat pocket. And away he went
again on his great long journey; it was three times as long this time as
it was the first day; however, he found the place, and there was a fine
bird on sentry. And Jack passed him, and he never said a word to him;
and he talked with the King, and told him everything, all about the
castle. “Well,” said the King to him, “you shall know in the morning
from my birds, whether they know anything or not.” Jack put up his horse
in the stable, and then went to bed, after having something to eat. And
when he got up in the morning the King and he went on to some field, and
there the King made some funny noise, and there came all the fowls that
were in all the world. And the King asked them; “Did they see the fine
castle?” and all the birds answered, No. “Well,” said the King, “where
is the great bird?” They had to wait then for a long time for the eagle
to make his appearance, when at last he came all in a perspiration,
after sending two little birds high up in the sky to whistle on him to
make all the haste he possibly could. The King asked the great bird,
Did he see the great castle? and the bird said: “Yes, I came from there
where it now is.” “Well,” says the King to him; “this young gentleman
has lost it, and you must go with him back to it; but stop till you get
a bit of something to eat first.”

They killed a thief, and sent the best part of it to feed the eagle on
his journey over the seas, and had to carry Jack on his back. Now when
they came in sight of the castle, they did not know what to do to get
the little golden box. Well, the little mouse said to them: “Leave me
down, and I will get the little box for you.” So the mouse stole into
the castle, and got hold of the box; and when he was coming down the
stairs, it fell down, and he was very near being caught. He came running
out with it, laughing his best. “Have you got it?” Jack said to him; he
said: “Yes;” and off they went back again, and left the castle behind.

As they were all of them (Jack, mouse, frog, and eagle) passing over
the great sea, they fell to quarrelling about which it was that got the
little box, till down it slipped into the water. (It was by them looking
at it and handing it from one hand to the other that they dropped the
little box to the bottom of the sea.) “Well, well,” said the frog, “I
knew that I would have to do something, so you had better let me go down
in the water.” And they let him go, and he was down for three days and
three nights; and up he comes, and shows his nose and little mouth out
of the water; and all of them asked him, Did he get it? and he told
them, No. “Well, what are you doing there, then?” “Nothing at all,” he
said, “only I want my full breath;” and the poor little frog went down
the second time, and he was down for a day and a night, and up he brings
it.

And away they did go, after being there four days and nights; and after
a long tug over seas and mountains, arrive at the palace of the old
King, who is the master of all the birds in the world. And the King
is very proud to see them, and has a hearty welcome and a long
conversation. Jack opens the little box, and told the little men to go
back and to bring the castle here to them; “and all of you make as much
haste back again as you possibly can.”

The three little men went off; and when they came near the castle they
were afraid to go to it till the gentleman and lady and all the servants
were gone out to some dance. And there was no one left behind there only
the cook and another maid with her; and the little red men asked them
which would they rather--go, or stop behind? and they both said: “I will
go with you;” and the little men told them to run upstairs quick. They
were no sooner up and in one of the drawing-rooms than here comes just
in sight the gentleman and lady and all the servants; but it was too
late. Off the castle went at full speed, with the women laughing at them
through the window, while they made motions for them to stop, but all to
no purpose.

They were nine days on their journey, in which they did try to keep the
Sunday holy, when one of the little men turned to be the priest, the
other the clerk, and third presided at the organ, and the women were
the singers, for they had a grand chapel in the castle already. Very
remarkable, there was a discord made in the music, and one of the little
men ran up one of the organ-pipes to see where the bad sound came
from, when he found out it only happened to be that the two women were
laughing at the little red man stretching his little legs full length
on the bass pipes, also his two arms the same time, with his little red
night-cap, which he never forgot to wear, and what they never witnessed
before, could not help calling forth some good merriment while on the
face of the deep. And poor thing! through them not going on with what
they begun with, they very near came to danger, as the castle was once
very near sinking in the middle of the sea.

At length, after a merry journey, they come again to Jack and the King.
The King was quite struck with the sight of the castle; and going up the
golden stairs, went to see the inside.

The King was very much pleased with the castle, but poor Jack's time of
a twelvemonths and a day was drawing to a close; and he, wishing to
go home to his young wife, gives orders to the three little men to
get ready by the next morning at eight o'clock to be off to the next
brother, and to stop there for one night; also to proceed from there
to the last or the youngest brother, the master of all the mice in the
world, in such place where the castle shall be left under his care until
it's sent for. Jack takes a farewell of the King, and thanks him very
much for his hospitality.

Away went Jack and his castle again, and stopped one night in that
place; and away they went again to the third place, and there left the
castle under his care. As Jack had to leave the castle behind, he had to
take to his own horse, which he left there when he first started.

Now poor Jack leaves his castle behind and faces towards home; and
after having so much merriment with the three brothers every night, Jack
became sleepy on horseback, and would have lost the road if it was not
for the little men a-guiding him. At last he arrived weary and tired,
and they did not seem to receive him with any kindness whatever,
because he had not found the stolen castle; and to make it worse, he was
disappointed in not seeing his young and beautiful wife to come and meet
him, through being hindered by her parents. But that did not stop long.
Jack put full power on and despatched the little men off to bring the
castle from there, and they soon got there.

Jack shook hands with the King, and returned many thanks for his kingly
kindness in minding the castle for him; and then Jack instructed the
little men to spur up and put speed on. And off they went, and were not
long before they reached their journey's end, when out comes the young
wife to meet him with a fine lump of a young SON, and they all lived
happy ever afterwards.




THE STORY OF THE THREE BEARS

Once upon a time there were Three Bears, who lived together in a house
of their own, in a wood. One of them was a Little, Small Wee Bear; and
one was a Middle-sized Bear, and the other was a Great, Huge Bear. They
had each a pot for their porridge, a little pot for the Little, Small,
Wee Bear; and a middle-sized pot for the Middle Bear, and a great pot
for the Great, Huge Bear. And they had each a chair to sit in; a little
chair for the Little, Small, Wee Bear; and a middle-sized chair for the
Middle Bear; and a great chair for the Great, Huge Bear. And they had
each a bed to sleep in; a little bed for the Little, Small, Wee Bear;
and a middle-sized bed for the Middle Bear; and a great bed for the
Great, Huge Bear.

One day, after they had made the porridge for their breakfast, and
poured it into their porridge-pots, they walked out into the wood while
the porridge was cooling, that they might not burn their mouths, by
beginning too soon to eat it. And while they were walking, a little
old Woman came to the house. She could not have been a good, honest old
Woman; for first she looked in at the window, and then she peeped in at
the keyhole; and seeing nobody in the house, she lifted the latch. The
door was not fastened, because the Bears were good Bears, who did nobody
any harm, and never suspected that anybody would harm them. So the
little old Woman opened the door, and went in; and well pleased she was
when she saw the porridge on the table. If she had been a good little
old Woman, she would have waited till the Bears came home, and then,
perhaps, they would have asked her to breakfast; for they were good
Bears--a little rough or so, as the manner of Bears is, but for all
that very good-natured and hospitable. But she was an impudent, bad old
Woman, and set about helping herself.

So first she tasted the porridge of the Great, Huge Bear, and that was
too hot for her; and she said a bad word about that. And then she tasted
the porridge of the Middle Bear, and that was too cold for her; and she
said a bad word about that too. And then she went to the porridge of the
Little, Small, Wee Bear, and tasted that; and that was neither too hot,
nor too cold, but just right; and she liked it so well, that she ate
it all up: but the naughty old Woman said a bad word about the little
porridge-pot, because it did not hold enough for her.

Then the little old Woman sate down in the chair of the Great, Huge
Bear, and that was too hard for her. And then she sate down in the chair
of the Middle Bear, and that was too soft for her. And then she sate
down in the chair of the Little, Small, Wee Bear, and that was neither
too hard, nor too soft, but just right. So she seated herself in it, and
there she sate till the bottom of the chair came out, and down she came,
plump upon the ground. And the naughty old Woman said a wicked word
about that too.

Then the little old Woman went upstairs into the bed-chamber in which
the three Bears slept. And first she lay down upon the bed of the Great,
Huge Bear; but that was too high at the head for her. And next she lay
down upon the bed of the Middle Bear; and that was too high at the foot
for her. And then she lay down upon the bed of the Little, Small, Wee
Bear; and that was neither too high at the head, nor at the foot, but
just right. So she covered herself up comfortably, and lay there till
she fell fast asleep.

By this time the Three Bears thought their porridge would be cool
enough; so they came home to breakfast. Now the little old Woman had
left the spoon of the Great, Huge Bear, standing in his porridge.

“Somebody has been at my porridge!”

said the Great, Huge Bear, in his great, rough, gruff voice. And when
the Middle Bear looked at his, he saw that the spoon was standing in it
too. They were wooden spoons; if they had been silver ones, the naughty
old Woman would have put them in her pocket.

“Somebody has been at my porridge!”

said the Middle Bear in his middle voice.

Then the Little, Small, Wee Bear looked at his, and there was the spoon
in the porridge-pot, but the porridge was all gone.

“Somebody has been at my porridge, and has eaten it all up!”

said the Little, Small, Wee Bear, in his little, small, wee voice.

Upon this the Three Bears, seeing that some one had entered their house,
and eaten up the Little, Small, Wee Bear's breakfast, began to look
about them. Now the little old Woman had not put the hard cushion
straight when she rose from the chair of the Great, Huge Bear.

“Somebody has been sitting in my chair!”

said the Great, Huge Bear, in his great, rough, gruff voice.

And the little old Woman had squatted down the soft cushion of the
Middle Bear.

“Somebody has been sitting in my chair!”

said the Middle Bear, in his middle voice.

And you know what the little old Woman had done to the third chair.

“Somebody has been sitting in my chair and has sate the bottom out of
it!”

said the Little, Small, Wee Bear, in his little, small, wee voice.

Then the Three Bears thought it necessary that they should make farther
search; so they went upstairs into their bedchamber. Now the little old
Woman had pulled the pillow of the Great, Huge Bear, out of its place.

“Somebody has been lying in my bed!”

said the Great, Huge Bear, in his great, rough, gruff voice.

And the little old Woman had pulled the bolster of the Middle Bear out
of its place.

“Somebody has been lying in my bed!”

said the Middle Bear, in his middle voice.

And when the Little, Small, Wee Bear came to look at his bed, there was
the bolster in its place; and the pillow in its place upon the bolster;
and upon the pillow was the little old Woman's ugly, dirty head,--which
was not in its place, for she had no business there.

“Somebody has been lying in my bed,--and here she is!”

said the Little, Small, Wee Bear, in his little, small, wee voice.

The little old Woman had heard in her sleep the great, rough, gruff
voice of the Great, Huge Bear; but she was so fast asleep that it was
no more to her than the roaring of wind, or the rumbling of thunder. And
she had heard the middle voice, of the Middle Bear, but it was only as
if she had heard some one speaking in a dream. But when she heard the
little, small, wee voice of the Little, Small, Wee Bear, it was so
sharp, and so shrill, that it awakened her at once. Up she started; and
when she saw the Three Bears on one side of the bed, she tumbled herself
out at the other, and ran to the window. Now the window was open,
because the Bears, like good, tidy Bears, as they were, always opened
their bedchamber window when they got up in the morning. Out the little
old Woman jumped; and whether she broke her neck in the fall; or ran
into the wood and was lost there; or found her way out of the wood, and
was taken up by the constable and sent to the House of Correction for
a vagrant as she was, I cannot tell. But the Three Bears never saw
anything more of her.




JACK THE GIANT-KILLER

When good King Arthur reigned, there lived near the Land's End of
England, in the county of Cornwall, a farmer who had one only son called
Jack. He was brisk and of a ready lively wit, so that nobody or nothing
could worst him.

In those days the Mount of Cornwall was kept by a huge giant named
Cormoran. He was eighteen feet in height, and about three yards round
the waist, of a fierce and grim countenance, the terror of all the
neighbouring towns and villages. He lived in a cave in the midst of the
Mount, and whenever he wanted food he would wade over to the main-land,
where he would furnish himself with whatever came in his way. Everybody
at his approach ran out of their houses, while he seized on their
cattle, making nothing of carrying half-a-dozen oxen on his back at a
time; and as for their sheep and hogs, he would tie them round his waist
like a bunch of tallow-dips. He had done this for many years, so that
all Cornwall was in despair.

One day Jack happened to be at the town-hall when the magistrates were
sitting in council about the Giant. He asked: “What reward will be given
to the man who kills Cormoran?” “The giant's treasure,” they said, “will
be the reward.” Quoth Jack: “Then let me undertake it.”

So he got a horn, shovel, and pickaxe, and went over to the Mount in the
beginning of a dark winter's evening, when he fell to work, and before
morning had dug a pit twenty-two feet deep, and nearly as broad,
covering it over with long sticks and straw. Then he strewed a little
mould over it, so that it appeared like plain ground. Jack then placed
himself on the opposite side of the pit, farthest from the giant's
lodging, and, just at the break of day, he put the horn to his mouth,
and blew, Tantivy, Tantivy. This noise roused the giant, who rushed
from his cave, crying: “You incorrigible villain, are you come here
to disturb my rest? You shall pay dearly for this. Satisfaction I will
have, and this it shall be, I will take you whole and broil you for
breakfast.” He had no sooner uttered this, than he tumbled into the pit,
and made the very foundations of the Mount to shake. “Oh, Giant,” quoth
Jack, “where are you now? Oh, faith, you are gotten now into Lob's
Pound, where I will surely plague you for your threatening words: what
do you think now of broiling me for your breakfast? Will no other diet
serve you but poor Jack?” Then having tantalised the giant for a while,
he gave him a most weighty knock with his pickaxe on the very crown of
his head, and killed him on the spot.

Jack then filled up the pit with earth, and went to search the cave,
which he found contained much treasure. When the magistrates heard of
this they made a declaration he should henceforth be termed

JACK THE GIANT-KILLER

and presented him with a sword and a belt, on which were written these
words embroidered in letters of gold:

  “Here's the right valiant Cornish man,
  Who slew the giant Cormoran.”

The news of Jack's victory soon spread over all the West of England,
so that another giant, named Blunderbore, hearing of it, vowed to be
revenged on Jack, if ever he should light on him. This giant was the
lord of an enchanted castle situated in the midst of a lonesome wood.
Now Jack, about four months afterwards, walking near this wood in his
journey to Wales, being weary, seated himself near a pleasant fountain
and fell fast asleep. While he was sleeping, the giant, coming there
for water, discovered him, and knew him to be the far-famed Jack the
Giant-killer by the lines written on the belt. Without ado, he took Jack
on his shoulders and carried him towards his castle. Now, as they passed
through a thicket, the rustling of the boughs awakened Jack, who was
strangely surprised to find himself in the clutches of the giant. His
terror was only begun, for, on entering the castle, he saw the ground
strewed with human bones, and the giant told him his own would ere
long be among them. After this the giant locked poor Jack in an immense
chamber, leaving him there while he went to fetch another giant, his
brother, living in the same wood, who might share in the meal on Jack.

After waiting some time Jack, on going to the window beheld afar off the
two giants coming towards the castle. “Now,” quoth Jack to himself, “my
death or my deliverance is at hand.” Now, there were strong cords in a
corner of the room in which Jack was, and two of these he took, and made
a strong noose at the end; and while the giants were unlocking the iron
gate of the castle he threw the ropes over each of their heads. Then
he drew the other ends across a beam, and pulled with all his might, so
that he throttled them. Then, when he saw they were black in the face,
he slid down the rope, and drawing his sword, slew them both. Then,
taking the giant's keys, and unlocking the rooms, he found three fair
ladies tied by the hair of their heads, almost starved to death. “Sweet
ladies,” quoth Jack, “I have destroyed this monster and his brutish
brother, and obtained your liberties.” This said he presented them with
the keys, and so proceeded on his journey to Wales.

Jack made the best of his way by travelling as fast as he could, but
lost his road, and was benighted, and could find any habitation until,
coming into a narrow valley, he found a large house, and in order to
get shelter took courage to knock at the gate. But what was his surprise
when there came forth a monstrous giant with two heads; yet he did not
appear so fiery as the others were, for he was a Welsh giant, and
what he did was by private and secret malice under the false show of
friendship. Jack, having told his condition to the giant, was shown into
a bedroom, where, in the dead of night, he heard his host in another
apartment muttering these words:

  “Though here you lodge with me this night,
  You shall not see the morning light
  My club shall dash your brains outright!”

“Say'st thou so,” quoth Jack; “that is like one of your Welsh tricks,
yet I hope to be cunning enough for you.” Then, getting out of bed, he
laid a billet in the bed in his stead, and hid himself in a corner of
the room. At the dead time of the night in came the Welsh giant, who
struck several heavy blows on the bed with his club, thinking he had
broken every bone in Jack's skin. The next morning Jack, laughing in his
sleeve, gave him hearty thanks for his night's lodging. “How have you
rested?” quoth the giant; “did you not feel anything in the night?”
 “No,” quoth Jack, “nothing but a rat, which gave me two or three slaps
with her tail.” With that, greatly wondering, the giant led Jack to
breakfast, bringing him a bowl containing four gallons of hasty pudding.
Being loth to let the giant think it too much for him, Jack put a large
leather bag under his loose coat, in such a way that he could convey the
pudding into it without its being perceived. Then, telling the giant he
would show him a trick, taking a knife, Jack ripped open the bag, and
out came all the hasty pudding. Whereupon, saying, “Odds splutters hur
nails, hur can do that trick hurself,” the monster took the knife, and
ripping open his belly, fell down dead.

Now, it happened in these days that King Arthur's only son asked his
father to give him a large sum of money, in order that he might go and
seek his fortune in the principality of Wales, where lived a beautiful
lady possessed with seven evil spirits. The king did his best to
persuade his son from it, but in vain; so at last gave way and the
prince set out with two horses, one loaded with money, the other for
himself to ride upon. Now, after several days' travel, he came to a
market-town in Wales, where he beheld a vast crowd of people gathered
together. The prince asked the reason of it, and was told that they had
arrested a corpse for several large sums of money which the deceased
owed when he died. The prince replied that it was a pity creditors
should be so cruel, and said: “Go bury the dead, and let his creditors
come to my lodging, and there their debts shall be paid.” They came,
in such great numbers that before night he had only twopence left for
himself.

Now Jack the Giant-Killer, coming that way, was so taken with the
generosity of the prince, that he desired to be his servant. This
being agreed upon, the next morning they set forward on their journey
together, when, as they were riding out of the town, an old woman called
after the prince, saying, “He has owed me twopence these seven years;
pray pay me as well as the rest.” Putting his hand to his pocket, the
prince gave the woman all he had left, so that after their day's food,
which cost what small spell Jack had by him, they were without a penny
between them.

When the sun got low, the king's son said: “Jack, since we have no
money, where can we lodge this night?”

But Jack replied: “Master, we'll do well enough, for I have an uncle
lives within two miles of this place; he is a huge and monstrous giant
with three heads; he'll fight five hundred men in armour, and make them
to fly before him.” “Alas!” quoth the prince, “what shall we do there?
He'll certainly chop us up at a mouthful. Nay, we are scarce enough to
fill one of his hollow teeth!”

“It is no matter for that,” quoth Jack; “I myself will go before and
prepare the way for you; therefore stop here and wait till I return.”
 Jack then rode away at full speed, and coming to the gate of the castle,
he knocked so loud that he made the neighbouring hills resound. The
giant roared out at this like thunder: “Who's there?”

Jack answered: “None but your poor cousin Jack.”

Quoth he: “What news with my poor cousin Jack?”

He replied: “Dear uncle, heavy news, God wot!”

“Prithee,” quoth the giant, “what heavy news can come to me? I am
a giant with three heads, and besides thou knowest I can fight five
hundred men in armour, and make them fly like chaff before the wind.”

“Oh, but,” quoth Jack, “here's the king's son a-coming with a thousand
men in armour to kill you and destroy all that you have!”

“Oh, cousin Jack,” said the giant, “this is heavy news indeed! I will
immediately run and hide myself, and thou shalt lock, bolt, and bar
me in, and keep the keys until the prince is gone.” Having secured the
giant, Jack fetched his master, when they made themselves heartily merry
whilst the poor giant lay trembling in a vault under the ground.

Early in the morning Jack furnished his master with a fresh supply of
gold and silver, and then sent him three miles forward on his journey,
at which time the prince was pretty well out of the smell of the giant.
Jack then returned, and let the giant out of the vault, who asked what
he should give him for keeping the castle from destruction. “Why,” quoth
Jack, “I want nothing but the old coat and cap, together with the old
rusty sword and slippers which are at your bed's head.” Quoth the giant:
“You know not what you ask; they are the most precious things I have.
The coat will keep you invisible, the cap will tell you all you want to
know, the sword cuts asunder whatever you strike, and the shoes are
of extraordinary swiftness. But you have been very serviceable to me,
therefore take them with all my heart.” Jack thanked his uncle, and then
went off with them. He soon overtook his master and they quickly arrived
at the house of the lady the prince sought, who, finding the prince to
be a suitor, prepared a splendid banquet for him. After the repast was
concluded, she told him she had a task for him. She wiped his mouth with
a handkerchief, saying: “You must show me that handkerchief to-morrow
morning, or else you will lose your head.” With that she put it in
her bosom. The prince went to bed in great sorrow, but Jack's cap of
knowledge informed him how it was to be obtained. In the middle of the
night she called upon her familiar spirit to carry her to Lucifer. But
Jack put on his coat of darkness and his shoes of swiftness, and was
there as soon as she was. When she entered the place of the Old One, she
gave the handkerchief to old Lucifer, who laid it upon a shelf, whence
Jack took it and brought it to his master, who showed it to the lady
next day, and so saved his life. On that day, she gave the prince a kiss
and told him he must show her the lips to-morrow morning that she kissed
last night, or lose his head.

“Ah!” he replied, “if you kiss none but mine, I will.”

“That is neither here nor there,” said she; “if you do not, death's your
portion!”

At midnight she went as before, and was angry with old Lucifer for
letting the handkerchief go. “But now,” quoth she, “I will be too hard
for the king's son, for I will kiss thee, and he is to show me thy
lips.” Which she did, and Jack, when she was not standing by, cut off
Lucifer's head and brought it under his invisible coat to his master,
who the next morning pulled it out by the horns before the lady. This
broke the enchantment and the evil spirit left her, and she appeared in
all her beauty. They were married the next morning, and soon after went
to the court of King Arthur, where Jack for his many great exploits, was
made one of the Knights of the Round Table.

Jack soon went searching for giants again, but he had not ridden far,
when he saw a cave, near the entrance of which he beheld a giant sitting
upon a block of timber, with a knotted iron club by his side. His goggle
eyes were like flames of fire, his countenance grim and ugly, and his
cheeks like a couple of large flitches of bacon, while the bristles of
his beard resembled rods of iron wire, and the locks that hung down upon
his brawny shoulders were like curled snakes or hissing adders. Jack
alighted from his horse, and, putting on the coat of darkness, went up
close to the giant, and said softly: “Oh! are you there? It will not
be long before I take you fast by the beard.” The giant all this while
could not see him, on account of his invisible coat, so that Jack,
coming up close to the monster, struck a blow with his sword at his
head, but, missing his aim, he cut off the nose instead. At this, the
giant roared like claps of thunder, and began to lay about him with his
iron club like one stark mad. But Jack, running behind, drove his sword
up to the hilt in the giant's back, so that he fell down dead. This
done, Jack cut off the giant's head, and sent it, with his brother's
also, to King Arthur, by a waggoner he hired for that purpose.

Jack now resolved to enter the giant's cave in search of his treasure,
and, passing along through a great many windings and turnings, he came
at length to a large room paved with freestone, at the upper end of
which was a boiling caldron, and on the right hand a large table, at
which the giant used to dine. Then he came to a window, barred with
iron, through which he looked and beheld a vast number of miserable
captives, who, seeing him, cried out: “Alas! young man, art thou come to
be one amongst us in this miserable den?”

“Ay,” quoth Jack, “but pray tell me what is the meaning of your
captivity?”

“We are kept here,” said one, “till such time as the giants have a wish
to feast, and then the fattest among us is slaughtered! And many are the
times they have dined upon murdered men!”

“Say you so,” quoth Jack, and straightway unlocked the gate and let them
free, who all rejoiced like condemned men at sight of a pardon. Then
searching the giant's coffers, he shared the gold and silver equally
amongst them and took them to a neighbouring castle, where they all
feasted and made merry over their deliverance.

But in the midst of all this mirth a messenger brought news that one
Thunderdell, a giant with two heads, having heard of the death of his
kinsmen, had come from the northern dales to be revenged on Jack, and
was within a mile of the castle, the country people flying before him
like chaff. But Jack was not a bit daunted, and said: “Let him come! I
have a tool to pick his teeth; and you, ladies and gentlemen, walk out
into the garden, and you shall witness this giant Thunderdell's death
and destruction.”

The castle was situated in the midst of a small island surrounded by a
moat thirty feet deep and twenty feet wide, over which lay a drawbridge.
So Jack employed men to cut through this bridge on both sides, nearly to
the middle; and then, dressing himself in his invisible coat, he marched
against the giant with his sword of sharpness. Although the giant could
not see Jack, he smelt his approach, and cried out in these words:

  “Fee, fi, fo, fum!
  I smell the blood of an Englishman!
  Be he alive or be he dead,
  I'll grind his bones to make me bread!”

“Say'st thou so,” said Jack; “then thou art a monstrous miller indeed.”

The giant cried out again: “Art thou that villain who killed my kinsmen?
Then I will tear thee with my teeth, suck thy blood, and grind thy bones
to powder.”

“You'll have to catch me first,” quoth Jack, and throwing off his
invisible coat, so that the giant might see him, and putting on his
shoes of swiftness, he ran from the giant, who followed like a walking
castle, so that the very foundations of the earth seemed to shake at
every step. Jack led him a long dance, in order that the gentlemen and
ladies might see; and at last to end the matter, ran lightly over the
drawbridge, the giant, in full speed, pursuing him with his club. Then,
coming to the middle of the bridge, the giant's great weight broke
it down, and he tumbled headlong into the water, where he rolled and
wallowed like a whale. Jack, standing by the moat, laughed at him all
the while; but though the giant foamed to hear him scoff, and plunged
from place to place in the moat, yet he could not get out to be
revenged. Jack at length got a cart-rope and cast it over the two heads
of the giant, and drew him ashore by a team of horses, and then cut
off both his heads with his sword of sharpness, and sent them to King
Arthur.

After some time spent in mirth and pastime, Jack, taking leave of the
knights and ladies, set out for new adventures. Through many woods he
passed, and came at length to the foot of a high mountain. Here, late
at night, he found a lonesome house, and knocked at the door, which was
opened by an aged man with a head as white as snow. “Father,” said Jack,
“can you lodge a benighted traveller that has lost his way?” “Yes,” said
the old man; “you are right welcome to my poor cottage.” Whereupon Jack
entered, and down they sat together, and the old man began to speak as
follows: “Son, I see by your belt you are the great conqueror of giants,
and behold, my son, on the top of this mountain is an enchanted castle,
this is kept by a giant named Galligantua, and he by the help of an
old conjurer, betrays many knights and ladies into his castle, where by
magic art they are transformed into sundry shapes and forms. But above
all, I grieve for a duke's daughter, whom they fetched from her father's
garden, carrying her through the air in a burning chariot drawn by fiery
dragons, when they secured her within the castle, and transformed her
into a white hind. And though many knights have tried to break the
enchantment, and work her deliverance, yet no one could accomplish it,
on account of two dreadful griffins which are placed at the castle gate
and which destroy every one who comes near. But you, my son, may pass
by them undiscovered, where on the gates of the castle you will find
engraven in large letters how the spell may be broken.” Jack gave the
old man his hand, and promised that in the morning he would venture his
life to free the lady.

In the morning Jack arose and put on his invisible coat and magic cap
and shoes, and prepared himself for the fray. Now, when he had reached
the top of the mountain he soon discovered the two fiery griffins, but
passed them without fear, because of his invisible coat. When he had got
beyond them, he found upon the gates of the castle a golden trumpet hung
by a silver chain, under which these lines were engraved:

  “Whoever shall this trumpet blow,
  Shall soon the giant overthrow,
  And break the black enchantment straight;
  So all shall be in happy state.”

Jack had no sooner read this but he blew the trumpet, at which the
castle trembled to its vast foundations, and the giant and conjurer were
in horrid confusion, biting their thumbs and tearing their hair, knowing
their wicked reign was at an end. Then the giant stooping to take up
his club, Jack at one blow cut off his head; whereupon the conjurer,
mounting up into the air, was carried away in a whirlwind. Then the
enchantment was broken, and all the lords and ladies who had so long
been transformed into birds and beasts returned to their proper shapes,
and the castle vanished away in a cloud of smoke. This being done, the
head of Galligantua was likewise, in the usual manner, conveyed to the
Court of King Arthur, where, the very next day, Jack followed, with the
knights and ladies who had been delivered. Whereupon, as a reward
for his good services, the king prevailed upon the duke to bestow his
daughter in marriage on honest Jack. So married they were, and the
whole kingdom was filled with joy at the wedding. Furthermore, the king
bestowed on Jack a noble castle, with a very beautiful estate thereto
belonging, where he and his lady lived in great joy and happiness all
the rest of their days.




HENNY-PENNY

One day Henny-penny was picking up corn in the cornyard
when--whack!--something hit her upon the head. “Goodness gracious me!”
 said Henny-penny; “the sky's a-going to fall; I must go and tell the
king.”

So she went along and she went along and she went along till she met
Cocky-locky. “Where are you going, Henny-penny?” says Cocky-locky. “Oh!
I'm going to tell the king the sky's a-falling,” says Henny-penny. “May
I come with you?” says Cocky-locky. “Certainly,” says Henny-penny. So
Henny-penny and Cocky-locky went to tell-the king the sky was falling.

They went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they met
Ducky-daddles. “Where are you going to, Henny-penny and Cocky-locky?”
 says Ducky-daddles. “Oh! we're going to tell the king the sky's
a-falling,” said Henny-penny and Cocky-locky. “May I come with you?”
 says Ducky-daddles. “Certainly,” said Henny-penny and Cocky-locky. So
Henny-penny, Cocky-locky and Ducky-daddles went to tell the king the sky
was a-falling.

So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till they
met Goosey-poosey, “Where are you going to, Henny-penny, Cocky-locky and
Ducky-daddles?” said Goosey-poosey. “Oh! we're going to tell the
king the sky's a-falling,” said Henny-penny and Cocky-locky and
Ducky-daddles. “May I come with you,” said Goosey-poosey. “Certainly,”
 said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky and Ducky-daddles. So Henny-penny,
Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles and Goosey-poosey went to tell the king the
sky was a-falling.

So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till
they met Turkey-lurkey. “Where are you going, Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles, and Goosey-poosey?” says Turkey-lurkey. “Oh! we're going
to tell the king the sky's a-falling,” said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles and Goosey-poosey. “May I come with you? Henny-penny,
Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles and Goosey-poosey?” said Turkey-lurkey. “Why,
certainly, Turkey-lurkey,” said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles,
and Goosey-poosey. So Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles,
Goosey-poosey and Turkey-lurkey all went to tell the king the sky was
a-falling.

So they went along, and they went along, and they went along, till
they met Foxy-woxy, and Foxy-woxy said to Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey and Turkey-lurkey: “Where are you
going, Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey,
and Turkey-lurkey?” And Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles,
Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey said to Foxy-woxy: “We're going to tell
the king the sky's a-falling.” “Oh! but this is not the way to the
king, Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey and
Turkey-lurkey,” says Foxy-woxy; “I know the proper way; shall I show
it you?” “Why certainly, Foxy-woxy,” said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky,
Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and Turkey-lurkey. So Henny-penny,
Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, Turkey-lurkey, and Foxy-woxy
all went to tell the king the sky was a-falling. So they went along,
and they went along, and they went along, till they came to a narrow and
dark hole. Now this was the door of Foxy-woxy's cave. But Foxy-woxy
said to Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and
Turkey-lurkey: “This is the short way to the king's palace you'll
soon get there if you follow me. I will go first and you come
after, Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky daddles, Goosey-poosey, and
Turkey-lurkey.” “Why of course, certainly, without doubt, why not?”
 said Henny-Penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey, and
Turkey-lurkey.

So Foxy-woxy went into his cave, and he didn't go very far but turned
round to wait for Henny-Penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles, Goosey-poosey
and Turkey-lurkey. So at last at first Turkey-lurkey went through the
dark hole into the cave. He hadn't got far when “Hrumph,” Foxy-woxy
snapped off Turkey-lurkey's head and threw his body over his left
shoulder. Then Goosey-poosey went in, and “Hrumph,” off went her head
and Goosey-poosey was thrown beside Turkey-lurkey. Then Ducky-daddles
waddled down, and “Hrumph,” snapped Foxy-woxy, and Ducky-daddles'
head was off and Ducky-daddles was thrown alongside Turkey-lurkey and
Goosey-poosey. Then Cocky-locky strutted down into the cave and he
hadn't gone far when “Snap, Hrumph!” went Foxy-woxy and Cocky-locky was
thrown alongside of Turkey-lurkey, Goosey-poosey and Ducky-daddles.

But Foxy-woxy had made two bites at Cocky-locky, and when the first
snap only hurt Cocky-locky, but didn't kill him, he called out to
Henny-penny. So she turned tail and ran back home, so she never told the
king the sky was a-falling.




CHILDE ROWLAND

Childe Rowland and his brothers twain Were playing at the ball, And
there was their sister Burd Ellen In the midst, among them all.

  Childe Rowland kicked it with his foot
  And caught it with his knee;
  At last as he plunged among them all
  O'er the church he made it flee.

  Burd Ellen round about the aisle
  To seek the ball is gone,
  But long they waited, and longer still,
  And she came not back again.

  They sought her east, they sought her west,
  They sought her up and down,
  And woe were the hearts of those brethren,
  For she was not to be found.

So at last her eldest brother went to the Warlock Merlin and told him
all the case, and asked him if he knew where Burd Ellen was. “The fair
Burd Ellen,” said the Warlock Merlin, “must have been carried off by the
fairies, because she went round the church 'wider shins'--the opposite
way to the sun. She is now in the Dark Tower of the King of Elfland; it
would take the boldest knight in Christendom to bring her back.”

“If it is possible to bring her back,” said her brother, “I'll do it, or
perish in the attempt.”

“Possible it is,” said the Warlock Merlin, “but woe to the man or
mother's son that attempts it, if he is not well taught beforehand what
he is to do.”

The eldest brother of Burd Ellen was not to be put off, by any fear of
danger, from attempting to get her back, so he begged the Warlock Merlin
to tell him what he should do, and what he should not do, in going to
seek his sister. And after he had been taught, and had repeated his
lesson, he set out for Elfland.

  But long they waited, and longer still,
    With doubt and muckle pain,
  But woe were the hearts of his brethren,
    For he came not back again.

Then the second brother got tired and sick of waiting, and he went to
the Warlock Merlin and asked him the same as his brother. So he set out
to find Burd Ellen.

  But long they waited, and longer still,
    With muckle doubt and pain,
  And woe were his mother's and brother's heart,
    For he came not back again.

And when they had waited and waited a good long time, Childe Rowland,
the youngest of Burd Ellen's brothers, wished to go, and went to his
mother, the good queen, to ask her to let him go. But she would not at
first, for he was the last of her children she now had, and if he was
lost, all would be lost. But he begged, and he begged, till at last the
good queen let him go, and gave him his father's good brand that never
struck in vain. And as she girt it round his waist, she said the spell
that would give it victory.

So Childe Rowland said good-bye to the good queen, his mother, and went
to the cave of the Warlock Merlin. “Once more, and but once more,” he
said to the Warlock, “tell how man or mother's son may rescue Burd Ellen
and her brothers twain.”

“Well, my son,” said the Warlock Merlin, “there are but two things,
simple they may seem, but hard they are to do. One thing to do, and one
thing not to do. And the thing to do is this: after you have entered the
land of Fairy, whoever speaks to you, till you meet the Burd Ellen,
you must out with your father's brand and off with their head. And what
you've not to do is this: bite no bit, and drink no drop, however hungry
or thirsty you be; drink a drop, or bite a bit, while in Elfland you be
and never will you see Middle Earth again.”

So Childe Rowland said the two things over and over again, till he knew
them by heart, and he thanked the Warlock Merlin and went on his way.
And he went along, and along, and along, and still further along, till
he came to the horse-herd of the King of Elfland feeding his horses.
These he knew by their fiery eyes, and knew that he was at last in
the land of Fairy. “Canst thou tell me,” said Childe Rowland to the
horse-herd, “where the King of Elfland's Dark Tower is?” “I cannot tell
thee,” said the horse-herd, “but go on a little further and thou wilt
come to the cow-herd, and he, maybe, can tell thee.”

Then, without a word more, Childe Rowland drew the good brand that never
struck in vain, and off went the horse-herd's head, and Childe Rowland
went on further, till he came to the cow-herd, and asked him the same
question. “I can't tell thee,” said he, “but go on a little farther, and
thou wilt come to the hen-wife, and she is sure to know.” Then Childe
Rowland out with his good brand, that never struck in vain, and off went
the cow-herd's head. And he went on a little further, till he came to an
old woman in a grey cloak, and he asked her if she knew where the Dark
Tower of the King of Elfland was. “Go on a little further,” said
the hen-wife, “till you come to a round green hill, surrounded with
terrace-rings, from the bottom to the top; go round it three times,
widershins, and each time say:

  Open, door! open, door!
  And let me come in.

and the third time the door will open, and you may go in.” And Childe
Rowland was just going on, when he remembered what he had to do; so he
out with the good brand, that never struck in vain, and off went the
hen-wife's head.

Then he went on, and on, and on, till he came to the round green hill
with the terrace-rings from top to bottom, and he went round it three
times, widershins, saying each time:

  Open, door! open, door!
  And let me come in.

And the third time the door did open, and he went in, and it closed with
a click, and Childe Rowland was left in the dark.

It was not exactly dark, but a kind of twilight or gloaming. There
were neither windows nor candles, and he could not make out where the
twilight came from, if not through the walls and roof. These were rough
arches made of a transparent rock, incrusted with sheepsilver and rock
spar, and other bright stones. But though it was rock, the air was quite
warm, as it always is in Elfland. So he went through this passage till
at last he came to two wide and high folding-doors which stood ajar. And
when he opened them, there he saw a most wonderful and glorious sight.
A large and spacious hall, so large that it seemed to be as long, and as
broad, as the green hill itself. The roof was supported by fine pillars,
so large and lofty, that the pillars of a cathedral were as nothing to
them. They were all of gold and silver, with fretted work, and between
them and around them, wreaths of flowers, composed of what do you think?
Why, of diamonds and emeralds, and all manner of precious stones. And
the very key-stones of the arches had for ornaments clusters of diamonds
and rubies, and pearls, and other precious stones. And all these arches
met in the middle of the roof, and just there, hung by a gold chain,
an immense lamp made out of one big pearl hollowed out and quite
transparent. And in the middle of this was a big, huge carbuncle, which
kept spinning round and round, and this was what gave light by its rays
to the whole hall, which seemed as if the setting sun was shining on it.

The hall was furnished in a manner equally grand, and at one end of
it was a glorious couch of velvet, silk and gold, and there sate Burd
Ellen, combing her golden hair with a silver comb. And when she saw
Childe Rowland she stood up and said:

  “God pity ye, poor luckless fool,
  What have ye here to do?

  “Hear ye this, my youngest brother,
  Why didn't ye bide at home?
  Had you a hundred thousand lives
  Ye couldn't spare any a one.

  “But sit ye down; but woe, O, woe,
  That ever ye were born,
  For come the King of Elfland in,
  Your fortune is forlorn.”

Then they sate down together, and Childe Rowland told her all that he
had done, and she told him how their two brothers had reached the Dark
Tower, but had been enchanted by the King of Elfland, and lay there
entombed as if dead. And then after they had talked a little longer
Childe Rowland began to feel hungry from his long travels, and told his
sister Burd Ellen how hungry he was and asked for some food, forgetting
all about the Warlock Merlin's warning.

Burd Ellen looked at Childe Rowland sadly, and shook her head, but she
was under a spell, and could not warn him. So she rose up, and went
out, and soon brought back a golden basin full of bread and milk. Childe
Rowland was just going to raise it to his lips, when he looked at his
sister and remembered why he had come all that way. So he dashed the
bowl to the ground, and said: “Not a sup will I swallow, nor a bit will
I bite, till Burd Ellen is set free.”

Just at that moment they heard the noise of some one approaching, and a
loud voice was heard saying:

  “Fee, fi, fo, fum,
  I smell the blood of a Christian man,
  Be he dead, be he living, with my brand,
  I'll dash his brains from his brain-pan.”

And then the folding-doors of the hall were burst open, and the King of
Elfland rushed in.

“Strike then, Bogle, if thou darest,” shouted out Childe Rowland, and
rushed to meet him with his good brand that never yet did fail. They
fought, and they fought, and they fought, till Childe Rowland beat the
King of Elfland down on to his knees, and caused him to yield and beg
for mercy. “I grant thee mercy,” said Childe Rowland, “release my sister
from thy spells and raise my brothers to life, and let us all go free,
and thou shalt be spared.” “I agree,” said the Elfin King, and rising
up he went to a chest from which he took a phial filled with a blood-red
liquor. With this he anointed the ears, eyelids, nostrils, lips, and
finger-tips, of the two brothers, and they sprang at once into life, and
declared that their souls had been away, but had now returned. The Elfin
king then said some words to Burd Ellen, and she was disenchanted, and
they all four passed out of the hall, through the long passage, and
turned their back on the Dark Tower, never to return again. And they
reached home, and the good queen, their mother, and Burd Ellen never
went round a church widershins again.




MOLLY WHUPPIE

Once upon a time there was a man and a wife had too many children, and
they could not get meat for them, so they took the three youngest and
left them in a wood. They travelled and travelled and could see never
a house. It began to be dark, and they were hungry. At last they saw a
light and made for it; it turned out to be a house. They knocked at the
door, and a woman came to it, who said: “What do you want?” They said:
“Please let us in and give us something to eat.” The woman said: “I
can't do that, as my man is a giant, and he would kill you if he comes
home.” They begged hard. “Let us stop for a little while,” said they,
“and we will go away before he comes.” So she took them in, and set them
down before the fire, and gave them milk and bread; but just as they had
begun to eat a great knock came to the door, and a dreadful voice said:

  “Fee, fie, fo, fum,
  I smell the blood of some earthly one.

Who have you there wife?” “Eh,” said the wife, “it's three poor lassies
cold and hungry, and they will go away. Ye won't touch 'em, man.” He
said nothing, but ate up a big supper, and ordered them to stay all
night. Now he had three lassies of his own, and they were to sleep in
the same bed with the three strangers.

The youngest of the three strange lassies was called Molly Whuppie, and
she was very clever. She noticed that before they went to bed the giant
put straw ropes round her neck and her sisters', and round his own
lassies' necks he put gold chains. So Molly took care and did not fall
asleep, but waited till she was sure every one was sleeping sound. Then
she slipped out of the bed, and took the straw ropes off her own and her
sisters' necks, and took the gold chains off the giant's lassies. She
then put the straw ropes on the giant's lassies and the gold on herself
and her sisters, and lay down.

And in the middle of the night up rose the giant, armed with a great
club, and felt for the necks with the straw. It was dark. He took his
own lassies out of bed on to the floor, and battered them until they
were dead, and then lay down again, thinking he had managed fine. Molly
thought it time she and her sisters were out of that, so she wakened
them and told them to be quiet, and they slipped out of the house. They
all got out safe, and they ran and ran, and never stopped until morning,
when they saw a grand house before them. It turned out to be a king's
house: so Molly went in, and told her story to the king. He said: “Well,
Molly, you are a clever girl, and you have managed well; but, if you
would manage better, and go back, and steal the giant's sword that hangs
on the back of his bed, I would give your eldest sister my eldest son to
marry.” Molly said she would try.

So she went back, and managed to slip into the giant's house, and crept
in below the bed. The giant came home, and ate up a great supper, and
went to bed. Molly waited until he was snoring, and she crept out, and
reached over the giant and got down the sword; but just as she got it
out over the bed it gave a rattle, and up jumped the giant, and Molly
ran out at the door and the sword with her; and she ran, and he ran,
till they came to the “Bridge of one hair”; and she got over, but he
couldn't, and he says, “Woe worth ye, Molly Whuppie! never ye come
again.” And she says “Twice yet, carle,” quoth she, “I'll come to
Spain.” So Molly took the sword to the king, and her sister was married
to his son.

Well, the king he says: “Ye've managed well, Molly; but if ye would
manage better, and steal the purse that lies below the giant's pillow,
I would marry your second sister to my second son.” And Molly said she
would try. So she set out for the giant's house, and slipped in, and hid
again below the bed, and waited till the giant had eaten his supper, and
was snoring sound asleep. She slipped out, and slipped her hand below
the pillow, and got out the purse; but just as she was going out the
giant wakened, and ran after her; and she ran, and he ran, till they
came to the “Bridge of one hair,” and she got over, but he couldn't, and
he said, “Woe worth ye, Molly Whuppie! never you come again.” “Once yet,
carle,” quoth she, “I'll come to Spain.” So Molly took the purse to the
king, and her second sister was married to the king's second son.

After that the king says to Molly: “Molly, you are a clever girl, but if
you would do better yet, and steal the giant's ring that he wears on his
finger, I will give you my youngest son for yourself.” Molly said she
would try. So back she goes to the giant's house, and hides herself
below the bed. The giant wasn't long ere he came home, and, after he had
eaten a great big supper, he went to his bed, and shortly was snoring
loud. Molly crept out and reached over the bed, and got hold of the
giant's hand, and she pulled and she pulled until she got off the ring;
but just as she got it off the giant got up, and gripped her by the
hand, and he says: “Now I have catcht you, Molly Whuppie, and, if I had
done as much ill to you as ye have done to me, what would ye do to me?”

Molly says: “I would put you into a sack, and I'd put the cat inside
with you, and the dog aside you, and a needle and thread and a shears,
and I'd hang you up upon the wall, and I'd go to the wood, and choose
the thickest stick I could get, and I would come home, and take you
down, and bang you till you were dead.”

“Well, Molly,” says the giant, “I'll just do that to you.”

So he gets a sack, and puts Molly into it, and the cat and the dog
beside her, and a needle and thread and shears, and hangs her up upon
the wall, and goes to the wood to choose a stick.

Molly she sings out: “Oh, if ye saw what I see.”

“Oh,” says the giant's wife, “what do ye see, Molly?”

But Molly never said a word but, “Oh, if ye saw what I see!”

The giant's wife begged that Molly would take her up into the sack till
she would see what Molly saw. So Molly took the shears and cut a hole in
the sack, and took out the needle and thread with her, and jumped down
and helped, the giant's wife up into the sack, and sewed up the hole.

The giant's wife saw nothing, and began to ask to get down again; but
Molly never minded, but hid herself at the back of the door. Home came
the giant, and a great big tree in his hand, and he took down the sack,
and began to batter it. His wife cried, “It's me, man;” but the dog
barked and the cat mewed, and he did not know his wife's voice. But
Molly came out from the back of the door, and the giant saw her, and he
after her; and he ran and she ran, till they came to the “Bridge of one
hair,” and she got over but he couldn't; and he said, “Woe worth you,
Molly Whuppie! never you come again.” “Never more, carle,” quoth she,
“will I come again to Spain.”

So Molly took the ring to the king, and she was married to his youngest
son, and she never saw the giant again.




THE RED ETTIN

There was once a widow that lived on a small bit of ground, which she
rented from a farmer. And she had two sons; and by-and-by it was time
for the wife to send them away to seek their fortune. So she told her
eldest son one day to take a can and bring her water from the well, that
she might bake a cake for him; and however much or however little water
he might bring, the cake would be great or small accordingly, and that
cake was to be all that she could give him when he went on his travels.

The lad went away with the can to the well, and filled it with water,
and then came away home again; but the can being broken, the most part
of the water had run out before he got back. So his cake was very small;
yet small as it was, his mother asked him if he was willing to take the
half of it with her blessing, telling him that, if he chose rather to
take the whole, he would only get it with her curse. The young man,
thinking he might have to travel a far way, and not knowing when or
how he might get other provisions, said he would like to have the whole
cake, come of his mother's malison what like; so she gave him the whole
cake, and her malison along with it. Then he took his brother aside, and
gave him a knife to keep till he should come back, desiring him to look
at it every morning, and as long as it continued to be clear, then he
might be sure that the owner of it was well; but if it grew dim and
rusty, then for certain some ill had befallen him.

So the young man went to seek his fortune. And he went all that day, and
all the next day; and on the third day, in the afternoon, he came up to
where a shepherd was sitting with a flock of sheep. And he went up to
the shepherd and asked him who the sheep belonged to; and he answered:

  “The Red Ettin of Ireland
    Once lived in Ballygan,
  And stole King Malcolm's daughter
    The king of fair Scotland.

  He beats her, he binds her,
    He lays her on a band;
  And every day he strikes her
    With a bright silver wand.
  Like Julian the Roman,
  He's one that fears no man.

  It's said there's one predestinate
    To be his mortal foe;
  But that man is yet unborn,
    And long may it be so.”

This shepherd also told him to beware of the beasts he should next meet,
for they were of a very different kind from any he had yet seen.

So the young man went on, and by-and-by he saw a multitude of very
dreadful beasts, with two heads, and on every head four horns. And he
was sore frightened, and ran away from them as fast as he could; and
glad was he when he came to a castle that stood on a hillock, with the
door standing wide open to the wall. And he went into the castle for
shelter, and there he saw an old wife sitting beside the kitchen fire.
He asked the wife if he might stay for the night, as he was tired with
a long journey; and the wife said he might, but it was not a good
place for him to be in, as it belonged to the Red Ettin, who was a very
terrible beast, with three heads, that spared no living man it could get
hold of. The young man would have gone away, but he was afraid of the
beasts on the outside of the castle; so he beseeched the old woman to
hide him as best she could, and not tell the Ettin he was there. He
thought, if he could put over the night, he might get away in the
morning, without meeting with the beasts, and so escape. But he had not
been long in his hiding-hole, before the awful Ettin came in; and no
sooner was he in, than he was heard crying:

  “Snouk but and snouk ben,
  I find the smell of an earthly man,
  Be he living, or be he dead,
  His heart this night shall kitchen my bread.”